Whole-Body Nonlinear Model Predictive Control Through Contacts for
Quadrupeds

arXiv:1712.02889v1 [cs.RO] 7 Dec 2017

Michael Neunert1 , Markus Stäuble1 , Markus Giftthaler1 , Carmine D. Bellicoso2 , Jan Carius2
Christian Gehring2 , Marco Hutter2 and Jonas Buchli1
Abstract— In this work we present a whole-body Nonlinear
Model Predictive Control approach for Rigid Body Systems subject to contacts. We use a full dynamic system model which also
includes explicit contact dynamics. Therefore, contact locations,
sequences and timings are not prespecified but optimized by
the solver. Yet, thorough numerical and software engineering
allows for running the nonlinear Optimal Control solver at
rates up to 190 Hz on a quadruped for a time horizon of half
a second. This outperforms the state of the art by at least one
order of magnitude. Hardware experiments in form of periodic
and non-periodic tasks are applied to two quadrupeds with
different actuation systems. The obtained results underline the
performance, transferability and robustness of the approach.

I. INTRODUCTION
In this paper, we present a whole-body Nonlinear Model
Predictive Control (NMPC) approach for Rigid Body Dynamics (RBD) systems subject to contacts. By using an explicit,
Auto-Differentiable contact model as part of the dynamic
system, the approach is able to reason about contacts and
optimize through them efficiently. Contact timings, sequences
or locations are not pre-specified, but an outcome of the
optimization. Thanks to a highly-efficient, unconstrained
nonlinear optimal control solver, we are able to successfully
apply the method to two different quadruped platforms. We
verify the performance and versatility of our approach by
testing a multitude of tasks including periodic gait patterns
as well as highly dynamic motions, such as squat jumps.
A. Related Work
Motion planning and control for legged, and especially
quadruped locomotion is often tackled with multi-stage
planning and control frameworks [1]–[4]. Such frameworks
often consist of one or multiple planner stages that use a
simplified model and a reactive tracking controller. This
results in the dilemma that the planner does not always
produce feasible, i.e. dynamically consistent, plans or needs
to plan conservatively. The tracking controller on the other
hand does not have enough control authority to e.g. modify
foothold positions or contact timings, but blindly tries to track
the planners reference. In this field, centroidal dynamics
approaches [5]–[9] become increasingly popular as they
capture the core dynamics of the problem. However, many
of these approaches plan or optimize contact forces that are
not guaranteed to be realizable.
1 Agile & Dexterous Robotics Lab, ETH Zürich, Switzerland. {neunertm,

mgiftthaler, markusta, buchlij}@ethz.ch
2 Robotic Systems Lab, ETH Zürich, Switzerland. {bcarmine, jcarius,

gehrinch, mahutter}@ethz.ch

Fig. 1. The quadrupeds HyQ-blue (left front) and ANYmal (right), which
served as test platforms for our MPC experiments.

In recent years, there has been an increasing number
of whole-body optimization and optimal control based approaches [4], [10]–[13]. While these approaches are very
complete, their runtimes are still a few orders of magnitudes
away from running in receding horizon or MPC fashion.
There are also some whole-body NMPC approaches verified
in simulation [14]. However, without hardware validation, it
remains an open question if and how well these approaches
can be applied to real robots. While whole-body, contact
invariant NMPC has been demonstrated on hardware before [15], the presented motions were rather slow or even
quasi static, underlined by the fact that the authors do not
apply the torque output to the robot but instead only use the
position and velocity trajectories as references for the joint
controllers. Additionally, contact switching was not dynamic
and artificially enforced. Also stability during execution was
explicitly encoded in the task.
B. Contributions
In this work, we demonstrate whole-body, contact invariant
nonlinear MPC for highly dynamic motions that require
explicit reasoning about the full dynamics of the system
and the contacts. Furthermore, to the best of our knowledge,
we demonstrate that such a framework can be applied to
both single motions as well as periodic gaits on hardware
for the first time. We show that the approach transfers
between platforms, and apply the same framework to the
two quadrupeds HyQ and ANYmal (Figure 1). We also
demonstrate the robustness and replanning capabilities of
the approach by adding significant disturbances during
execution. We summarize our solver framework, which uses
Auto-Differentiation and code generation to achieve high
computational performance exceeding the current state of the
art in robotics NMPC applications by at least one order
of magnitude. In contrast to many previous approaches,
our solver is also available as open-source software [16].

Furthermore, we also publish the cost function weights used
during experiments to ensure reproducibility.
In previous work [17], we demonstrated the versatility of
optimizing whole-body motions through contacts. However,
trajectories were only optimized once before execution. Also,
especially interesting tasks such as periodic gaits could not be
transferred to hardware due to model mismatches and lack of
robustness of the plans. In this work, we demonstrate that an
NMPC approach which continuously re-optimizes the state
and control trajectories at high frequency, results in robust
performance and copes with model mismatches. Running
NMPC on real hardware poses severe restrictions in terms
of computation time and software integration. In this work,
we describe how we overcome these issues and improve our
solver to achieve a speedup of several orders of magnitude.
C. Structure of this paper
We organize the paper as follows. In Section II, we
define how we formulate the NMPC problem for Rigid Body
Dynamics Systems. In Section III we describe our approach
of solving the problem. Afterwards, in Sections IV and V, we
describe the implementation from a software point of view as
well as the integration on hardware. In Section VI, we then
present our experiments and discuss the results and findings.
Finally, in Section VII we summarize the paper and provide
an outlook to future work.
II. NMPC FOR RIGID BODY SYSTEMS
The NMPC approach used in this work recurrently solves
finite-horizon Optimal Control Problems with cost functions
of the form
Z tf
J(x(t), u(t)) = h (x(tf )) +
L (x(t), u(t), t) dt (1)
t=0

and nonlinear system dynamics
ẋ(t) = f (x(t), u(t), t),

x(0) = x0

> > >
> >
>
x = [W q > L q̇ > ]> = [W q >
(4)
B W xB q J L ω B L ẋB q̇ J ]

where the pose is expressed in an inertial “world” frame
W and the twist is expressed in a local body frame B.
Due to the different reference frames, the twist is not a
pure time derivative of the pose, but requires an additional
coordinate transform T WL which is composed of a pure
rotation matrix for linear velocities as well as a slightly more
complex mapping matrix for angular velocities. This leads to
the overall system dynamics
h
i>
ẋ(t) = W q̇ > L q̈ >
(5)


T WL L q̇
=
M −1 (q)(S > τ + J c λ(q, q̇) − C(q, q̇) − G(q))
B. Contact Model
In order to avoid pre-specifying contact sequences, locations or timings, we need to enable the NMPC solver to reason
about contacts. Some approaches resort to adding complementarity constraints to enforce contacts (e.g. [18]). However,
these constraints do not satisfy the Linear Independence
Constraint Qualification (LICQ) [19]. Almost all off-theshelf Nonlinear Optimal Control or Nonlinear Programming
solvers assume LICQ and, therefore, cannot handle these
problems [20]. In contrast, we add the contact physics to our
dynamic model using an explicit contact model. As a result,
the contact forces become an explicit function of the robot’s
state: λ(q, q̇) = g(x(t)).
Our contact model consists of a combination of linear
springs and dampers perpendicular and parallel to the contact
surface. For each end-effector we compute the contact model
in the specialized contact frame C as follows:

(2)
C λ(q, q̇) = − k exp(αk C pz (q))

with state and control trajectories x(t) and u(t).

− d sig(αd C pz (q)) C ṗ(q, q̇)

A. System Modelling
Analogously to [17], we consider general Rigid Body
Dynamics of the form
>
M (q)q̈ + C(q, q̇) + G(q) = J >
c λ(q, q̇) + S τ

and the base frame. We use an Euler-Angle parametrization
of the 3D orientation.
We define the state of our system as follows

(3)

where M 18×18 is the inertia matrix, C 18×1 captures Coriolis
and centripetal forces and G18×1 represents the gravity
terms. We further assume the system is actuated via joint
forces/torques τ 12×1 where the selection matrix S 18×12 maps
these forces to the actuated degrees of freedom. Additionally,
external forces λ12×1 act on the system via the contact
Jacobian (J c )18×12 . The joint positions/angles and their
velocities are denoted by q and q̇ respectively. In the case of a
floating base robot, these quantities also contain the base pose
(i.e. its orientation and position) as well as the base twist (i.e.
its linear and angular velocity). These quantities can also be
thought of as an unactuated 6 DoF joint between an inertial

(6)

with d and k being damper and spring parameters. In order
to achieve smooth derivatives, we multiply the damper-term
with a sigmoid function of the normal component pz (q) of
the contact surface penetration p(q). Both the exponential
and the sigmoid function serve as smoothing elements. Their
‘sharpness’ is controlled by αk and αd . Finally, the contact
forces are transformed into the robot body frame by
B λ(q, q̇) = RW B (q)C λ(q, q̇)

(7)

and subsequently passed to the forward dynamics where
they act on the corresponding link. Our particular choice
of the contact model smoothing supports the gradient-based
solver by ensuring that contact forces never completely vanish.
Therefore, the solver can reason about contacts even before
they are established. While this is slightly nonphysical, we
will later see that this does not hinder good performance
on hardware. We emphasize that there exists physically

more accurate explicit contact models [21] and implicit
contact models as popular in physics engines. The latter
however rely on optimization based solvers which cannot
be differentiated well. In contrast, our simplified model
captures the governing effects accurately enough and allows
for computing derivatives efficiently by using Auto-Diff which
is key to solving the NMPC problem fast enough [22].
III. NMPC APPROACH
Informally speaking, NMPC is achieved through solving the
Nonlinear Optimal Control (NLOC) problem at sufficiently
high rates. Popular approaches to nonlinear optimal control are
Single Shooting, Multiple Shooting or Direct Collocation [23],
which discretize the continuous time optimal control problem
and transcribe it into a Nonlinear Program (NLP). These NLPs
are often solved using general off-the-shelf NLP solvers as
presented in [24], [25]. However, such an approach does not
fully exploit the sparsity structure inherent to optimal control
problems and often results in poor algorithm runtimes, which
are not fast enough for MPC applications.
To overcome this issue, we formulate our problem as
an unconstrained optimal control problem, and resort to an
optimized, custom solver, that implements a family of iterative
Gauss-Newton NLOC algorithms [26]. The solver employs
a first-order method that locally approximates the NLOC
problem as a Linear Quadratic Optimal Control (LQOC)
problem using a Gauss-Newton Hessian approximation. The
LQOC is solved by a Riccati-based solver which has linear
complexity in the time horizon. This makes the approach
efficient for larger time horizons. Our solver can be considered
a generalization of the well-known iLQR [27] and SLQ [28]
algorithms and covers both Single and Multiple Shooting. It
designs time-varying state-feedback controllers of the form
un (x) = ufnf + K n (xn − xref
n )

(8)

where ufnf is the feedforward control action and K n a linear
feedback controller regulating deviations of the state xn from
the reference trajectory xref
n . For most experiments in this
paper, we use the iLQR algorithm. We furthermore compare
it to the more efficient Gauss-Newton Multiple Shooting
(GNMS) approach which can act as a direct replacement. Both
algorithms use the same approach of formulating and solving
a local LQOC problem, however their MPC formulations
varies.
A summary of the iLQR-NMPC algorithm, is given in
Algorithm 1. It shows two forward integration steps during the
algorithm. One directly after retrieving the state measurement
to get the nominal trajectory, and a second one during the line
search after updating the controller. For our application, the
latter is important to obtain a new reference trajectory for the
feedback controller to track. In contrast, the GNMS-NMPC
algorithm, which is summarized in Algorithm 2, designs a
state reference trajectory simultaneously with the new control
policy. Furthermore, it allows to separate the algorithm into
a feedback and a preparation phase [29], which helps to
minimize the latency between state-measurement and control

Algorithm 1 Discrete-time iLQR-MPC Algorithm
Given
- cost function (1) and system dynamics (2).
- receding MPC time horizon N .
- stable initial control policy un (x) of form (8)
Repeat Online:
- get state measurement xmeas .
- forward integrate system dynamics (2) with x0 = xmeas to obtain
state trajectories X = {x0 , x1 , . . . , xN }, control trajectories
U = {u0 , u1 , . . . , uN −1 } and corresponding sensitivities An , B n .
- quadratize cost function (1) around X and U
- solve LQOC problem using a Riccati backward sweep
- retrieve control policy u+
n (x) of form (8)
- line search over the control increment (un (x)+ − un (x))
and update X + by means of a forward simulation of the nonlinear
dynamics (2) with x0 = xmeas
+
- send policy u+
to the robot tracking controller
n (x) and X
- update un (x) ← u+
n (x)

Algorithm 2 Discrete-time GNMS-NMPC Algorithm
Given
- cost function (1) and system dynamics (2).
- receding MPC time horizon N .
- initial state and control trajectories X = {x0 , x1 , . . . , xN },
U = {u0 , u1 , . . . , uN −1 }
Repeat Online:
Feedback phase
- get state measurement xmeas .
- forward integrate system dynamics (2) with x0 = xmeas on the first
multiple-shooting interval, obtain sensitivities A0 , B 0 .
- quadratize cost function (1) around X and U for first control stage
- solve LQOC problem using a Riccati backward sweep
+
+
- retrieve updated control policy u+
n (x) and updated trajectories U , X .
+
- send policy u+
(x)
and
X
to
the
robot
tracking
controller
n
Preparation phase
+
+
- update: un (x) ← u+
n (x), X ← X , U ← U
- forward integrate system dynamics (2) for the multiple-shooting
intervals 1 to N , obtain sensitivities A1 , . . . AN −1 , B 1 , . . . , B N −1 .
- quadratize cost function (1) around X, U for multiple-shooting intervals 1 to N .

policy update. For a detailed overview about the GNMS
algorithm, the reader is referred to [26]. An open-source
reference implementation is available in [16].
IV. SOFTWARE IMPLEMENTATION
Running NMPC for a high dimensional system in realtime remains a challenge despite the powerful consumer PCs
available today. While the development of processors with
faster clock speed has stalled in recent years, processing
power instead foremost grows due to higher computation
core counts as well as vectorization. However, both parallel
execution and vectorization cannot be leveraged automatically
by standard compilers. Also, many computational routines
such as integrating a differential equation over time, are
naturally sequential operations that cannot be parallelized
easily. In this subsection we describe how we optimize the
NMPC solver from a numerical point of view and leverage
the processor architecture to reduce the computational burden.
A. Modelling Framework
Our NMPC controller relies heavily on evaluating Rigid
Body Dynamics and Kinematics. Therefore, we use RobCoGen [30], an efficient code generation framework for
modelling Rigid Body Dynamics. In [22] we augmented
RobCoGen to be compatible with Auto-Differentiation as
implemented in our Control Toolbox (CT) [16]. Furthermore,
we use CT’s contact model and kinematics that wrap around
RobCoGen to provide contact force mappings. The resulting

framework is lean compared to sophisticated physics engines
and produces fast to evaluate, hard realtime capable code.
B. Integration and Sensitivity Computation
Our system dynamics include a contact model that needs
to be chosen stiff enough to approximate the real physics
of contact well. Naturally, this leads to a numerical stiffness which requires us to take small integration time-steps.
Therefore, instead of using standard explicit integrators such
as Euler or Runge-Kutta schemes, we use symplectic (or
semi-implicit) integrators, which are also popular in physics
engines [31]. A symplectic integrator alternates between
integrating positions and velocities, i.e. the updated positions
are used to compute the velocity update and vice versa.
Therefore, the computational complexity is similar to an
explicit scheme, but the numerical stability is increased. In
contrast to implicit integrators, we do not have to compute
Jacobians explicitly and do not have to solve an internal
optimization problem. The symplectic integrator allows us to
increase the integration step size by a factor of four compared
to explicit schemes [17].
Our LQOC solver requires us to compute sensitivities along
the trajectory, i.e. partial derivatives of the integrated state
with respect to the start state and control action of the step.
These sensitivities can be understood as matrices An and B n
in a local linear approximation of the form xn+1 = An xn +
B n un + cn . While many existing approaches compute the
sensitivities numerically [15], it is slow and can lead to severe
numerical problems hindering convergence [32]. Therefore,
we compute them exactly by integrating a corresponding
sensitivity ODE. A description of the integration scheme for
sensitivities of symplectic integrators can be found in [33].
The linearization of our dynamic system is performed with
Auto-Diff and code-generation described in detail in [22],
which provides the same accuracy as analytic derivatives but
outperforms them in terms of computational speed.
C. Multithreading and Vectorization
Another important factor for obtaining best performance
is multi-threading. Some parts of our algorithm are inherently sequential, for example solving the LQOC problem
backwards in time, or the forward simulation of the system
when employing iLQR. However, using a multiple-shooting
approach allows us to parallelize the forward simulation
over the individual multiple-shooting intervals. In this case,
computation time decreases linearly with the number of cores.
In contrast, iLQR requires to compute a single, continuous
forward simulation and thus does not benefit from a multi-core
processor in this step. The cost and sensitivity computation,
which can be distributed among all available cores, is
parallelizable for all our algorithm variants.
Another optimization possibility is to use the processor’s vectorization capabilities, which are Single Instruction
Multiple Data (SIMD) implementations, especially useful
for mathematical operations on vectors and matrices. In a
previous implementation [17], we had already used SSE [34]

Fig. 2. Structure of the estimation and control approach for hardware
execution of the NMPC controller. Estimators estimate ground height and
base state information. The optimized control input obtained from the NMPC
solver is then augmented with the output of two tracking controllers.

instructions. In this implementation, we switched to AVX [34]
instructions. Since our code mostly consists of matrix and
vector manipulations and register sizes of AVX are doubled
over SSE, we obtained an additional speedup of almost a
factor of two. This number is also supported by the release
notes of the Eigen library [35] used for all computations.
With the release of AVX512 doubling register sizes yet again,
we expect another speedup of about factor of two.
V. HARDWARE INTEGRATION
A. Platform Descriptions
For hardware experiments we use two different quadruped
robots, that strongly vary in size, weight and actuation
principles. Therefore, the experiments underline the generality of the approach and show that no platform specific
modifications are required. HyQ is an 80 kg, hydraulically
actuated quadruped, while ANYmal weighs around 34 kg and
uses electric, series-elastic actuators. Both robots are briefly
described in the following.
1) HyQ: HyQ [36] is a fully torque controlled, hydraulic
quadruped built by the Italian Institute of Technology. It
features three joints per leg, namely Hip Abduction Adduction
(HAA), Hip Flexion Extension (HFE) and Knee Flexion
Extension (KFE). All joints are equipped with absolute and
relative encoders, the joint torques are measured by load cells.
2) ANYmal: While being more compact, ANYmal [37]
features the same joint configuration as HyQ. Furthermore,
it is fully torque controlled via series-elastic actuators. Joint
encoders before and after the elastic element measure its
deflection which is used to compute the internal joint torque.
B. Tracking Controller
The control and tracking framework mostly corresponds to
the one shown in Figure 2 also used in [17]. When running
our NMPC framework, we directly apply the optimized
torques as feedforward signal to the actuators. However,
in our framework, there is an average delay of about 1015 ms between state measurement and execution of the
corresponding, optimized policy on the robot. This delay
prevents from robustly controlling positions and velocities
of the swing legs. Therefore, we add a PD control loop
around the optimized joint trajectories that improves position
and velocity tracking. Lastly, we also add a virtual model

HyQ trot

weights

intermediate

temporal

final

ANYmal trot

weights

controller [38] using inverse dynamics (without gravity
compensation) which only contributes a few percent of the
overall control signal. Therefore, the presented tasks also
work without the base controller but show slightly improved
performance with the controller enabled.

D. Computing Setup
In our setup, we use a dedicated computer that runs the
NMPC control loop. The NMPC-node receives the current
state of the robot via the Robot Operating System (ROS)
from the midlevel control computer that executes the tracking
controller described in subsection V-B. Due to different
software and hardware architectures, this tracking controller
runs at 250 Hz on HyQ and at 400 Hz on ANYmal. The
midlevel controller then sends desired torque, position and
velocity setpoints to a lowlevel torque controller. In return, it
receives current state measurements and computes the base
and ground state estimate. The lowlevel controller runs a
torque tracking and a position PD controller at 1 kHz on
HyQ and 2.5 kHz on ANYmal. This controller is implemented
on embedded hard real-time systems on both robots.
VI. RESULTS
The performance of our algorithms is assessed on both
quadrupeds. We test a periodic trotting gait on both robots
and disturb them during the tests. Furthermore, we execute
additional dynamic motions on ANYmal. For all experiments,
the cost functions weights are visualized in figure 3 and
provided as supplementary material.
In all experiments, we employ a time horizon of 500 ms, a
control discretization of 4 ms and an integration rate of 1 ms
for the aforementioned symplectic Euler scheme. In this work
we employ the iLQR and GNMS solvers from [26], and use
the solution from the previous MPC iteration as a warm start.
We run a so called “real-time iteration scheme” [23], where
we apply the optimized trajectory after a single iteration. Note
that running only a single solver iteration before updating the
state measurement results in better overall performance than
running multiple iterations and letting the solver converge.
All results are obtained with the same settings, solver and
model. The different behaviors are thus simply a result of
the choice of cost function and weights, offering a great
versatility.

ANYmal squat jump

weights

Both quadrupeds run a state estimator that fuses measurements from an Inertial Measurement Unit (IMU) and
the leg encoders to estimate the base pose and twist of the
robot. The state estimator is described in [39]. Joint position
measurements are directly obtained from both robots and are
then numerically differentiated to obtain joint velocities. Since
we use an explicit contact model, an estimation of the ground
is required. Here we check the stance of each foot and fit a
plane through all stance legs. This ground estimator could
possibly be replaced in the future by a mapping approach
that delivers differentiable height information.

ANYmal forward jump

weights

C. State Estimation

base orientation

base position

joint pos. base angular vel.

base linear vel. joint vel.

Fig. 3. Cost function weights for the different hardware experiments plotted
on a logarithmic scale. All weighting matrices are diagonal and thus the
weights illustrated correspond to the diagonal entries. Weights on joint
positions qJ and velocities q̇J are the same for all legs. The temporal costs
in the trotting experiment affect swing leg pairs and are activated periodically.
For the squat and forward jump temporal costs affect all legs equally and
are activated once per jump.

A. Hardware Experiments HyQ
1) Trotting: As a first test, we investigate a periodic
gait pattern, encouraged over periodically activated costs
penalizing joint angle deviations from a desired swing
leg apex configuration. In previous work [17], we have
demonstrated that our approach can also discover a trotting
gait without swing leg costs. However, by adding such costs,
we can influence the gait frequency and encourage trotting
while staying in place. Since we only penalize the apex height
of the swing leg, exact contact timings are not specified but
can be adjusted by the algorithm. Additionally, since the
swing phase is not a constraint, it can be violated by the
algorithm if helpful for the overall performance. This can
be observed during execution. If the robot base is strongly
pushed to one side, the feet on that side are not lifted but
remain on the ground to first stabilize the base. This means
the algorithm naturally modifies the gait pattern and contact
timings to optimize performance. Another observation is
that, due to a feedforward dominant controller that plans
ahead of time instead of simply reacting aggressively to
disturbances, we obtain a compliant controller. HyQ can
be perturbed significantly both on the base and the legs
without reacting stiffly. Even placing planks under single
feet does not deteriorate performance. Figure 4 shows the
results of a trotting experiment on HyQ. The plot shows
that the base orientation and position deviations from the set
point are regulated and remain small. Also, we add a strong
cost penalty on the base orientation to improve stability. The
resulting overall controller is stable and can robustly handle
aforementioned disturbances.
B. Hardware Experiments ANYmal
1) Trotting: We repeat the same trotting experiments
with adjusted weights (due to different mass/inertias) on

20

torque [Nm]

orientation deviation [rad]
position deviation [m]

roll
pitch
yaw

0.1
0.05
0

0

5

10

xB

0.2

15

20

25

0

t [s]

yB

0.15

4

6

8

10

12

Fig. 6. Joint torques of ANYmal during a repeated squat jump. The torques
stay well below the physical torque limit of 40 Nm. Furthermore, the torques
drop quite abruptly after take off and then peak during the landing phase.

zB

0.1

2

t [s]

0.05
0
-0.05
5

10

15

20

25

t [s]

Fig. 4. Plots of the deviation of the orientation and position offset during
trotting experiments on HyQ. In the cost function, we penalize orientation
stronger than position which shows in the plots. Compared to ANYmal the
magnitude of the deviations is slightly larger. However, this is in part also
due to the different sizes of both robots.
0.06

orientation deviation [rad]

HAA
HFE
KFE

-20

-0.05

0

roll
pitch
yaw

0.04
0.02
0
-0.02
0

1

2

3

0.05

position deviation [m]

0

4

5

6

7

8

t [s]

0
xB

-0.05

yB
zB

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

t [s]

Fig. 5. Base orientation (top) and position (bottom) of ANYmal during
a trot. At t = 2.8s we placed a wooden stick below one foot which acted
as heavy disturbance on the system. The controller is able to return to a
periodic motion after the disturbance is removed.

ANYmal. Also here we observe that the controller is robust to
disturbances. By adjusting the desired position and orientation
of the base with a joystick, we navigate the robot around.
Figure 5 show measurements of the robot base during the
trotting experiment. These plots illustrate how the MPC
controller deals with disturbances. The robot is executing
a periodic trot motion in place. At t = 2.8s we placed a
wooden plank below one of ANYmal’s feet. For the duration
of the disturbance the MPC controller escapes the periodic trot
and finds different solutions. To mitigate the disturbance the
controller shifts and rotates the base and when the disturbance
is gone it returns to the periodic trot. Compared to HyQ the
deviations of the base orientation and position are much
smaller. One of the reasons for this is certainly the size and
weight differences between these two robots.
2) Squat Jumps: To underline that the approach can
leverage the full system dynamics, we also perform a squat
jump. Here, amongst the usual running and final cost, a

temporal cost encourages an upward base velocity at a
certain time point. However, the lift-off time and especially
the landing time are not pre-specified. Also, while it is
not surprising that all legs lift-off at the same time, we
do not explicitly enforce it. To test repeated jumps, we
activate the vertical velocity costs periodically. While the
robot does not always land perfectly, the MPC controller
optimizes a trajectory from the current state and tries to
get back as close as possible to the nominal state. This
experiment underlines the robustness of the approach, as
several squat jumps can be executed without resetting the
robot to the nominal configuration. Figures 7 and 6 show the
measurements of ANYmal during the squat jump experiments.
We enforce jumps every 2 seconds, starting at t = 1s. The
desired take off velocity was 1.0 m/s in vertical direction (z
axis) leading to an apex height of 3 cm. The measurements
show that the robot slightly overshoots the velocity setpoint
by 0.1 m/s during execution. On the torque level the robot
stayed well below the admissible torque level of ANYmal (40
Nm) without imposing additional constraints. The robot drifts
in x and y direction between consecutive squat jumps. The
reason for this is that we do not impose large cost penalties
in x and y positions for stability reasons. One interesting
observation is that the base height is lowered and the knees
are bent before jumping off to accumulate kinetic energy,
which reduces the maximum torque used for a given height.
3) Forward Jump: If we add a forward velocity component
to the squat jump, we obtain a forward jump behavior. Again,
lift-off time and landing time are not pre-specifed. Results
of the forward jump can be found in the submitted video.
C. Timings
In this section, we present timings for different solver
setups. For all timings and experiments, the NMPC solver is
run on an Intel Core i7 4790 quadcore PC with 3.6 GHz.
Figure 8 shows the timings obtained from the trotting
experiments on ANYmal. We measured the rate of incoming
trajectories that the tracking controller received. It can be seen
that our solver runs at around 80 Hz for when using the iLQRalgorithm and at 175 Hz when using Gauss-Newton MultipleShooting. The higher frequency of GNMS-MPC results from
three main factors: first, the parallel forward simulation,
second, in contrast to iLQR, GNMS does not require a linesearch for this particular problem, and third, the GNMS
algorithm allows for using a higher control discretization

0.1

xB

position [m]

y

0.05

z

B
B

0
-0.05
0

2

4

6

1

velocity [m/s]

8

t [s]

10

12

xB
yB

0.5

zB

VII. SUMMARY AND OUTLOOK

0
-0.5
0

2

4

6

8

10

12

t [s]

Fig. 7. Base position and linear velocity of ANYmal during a repeated squat
jump. We mostly penalize base orientation and linear velocities to obtain
straight jump motions. As a result, the controller achieves a constant apex
height but drifts slightly in x and y directions. We observe that ANYmal first
slightly bents its knees and lowers the base before jumping off to accumulate
energy, a behaviour that would not result from a pure feedback controller.

mpc update rate [Hz]

200
150
ILQR
GNMS

100
50
0
0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

90

t [s]

Fig. 8. MPC update rate as recorded during two trotting experiments on
ANYmal. While iLQR achieves update rates of around 80 Hz, GNMS reaches
almost 190 Hz. While the higher update rate does not lead to significantly
better performance, it leaves more headroom for extending the time horizon.

(6 ms). While GNMS offers a higher update rate, it is not
very noticeable in performance such that iLQR performs
similarly well. This is illustrated in Figure 9 which compares
the costs of the trajectories obtained from both algorithms
during a trot task. However, we notice that below 30 Hz
update rate, the performance on hardware starts to degrade
significantly. Therefore, GNMS leaves more headroom for
more complex systems or longer time horizons.
At 80 Hz, a single computation takes less than 12 ms.
Compared to [15], which is using the same algorithm but
requires around 50 ms per iteration, our solver is about 300%
faster for the same time horizon and similar number of degrees
of freedom while having a much finer control discretization
10 6
2

Cost

(4 ms instead of 20 ms) and only using a third of the CPU
cores. Assuming the same number of cores and the same
discretization, our solver would run about 10-15 times faster
than the one presented in [15]. This results from a more
efficient solver implementation, optimized vectorization, faster
computation of the dynamics due to a simpler contact model
as well as using Auto-Diff code-generation. As a result, delays
are significantly reduced, which is crucial for robustness.

iLQR
GNMS

1.5

1
0

0.5

1

1.5

2

2.5

3

3.5

4

4.5

t [s]

Fig. 9. Total cost of the iLQR and GNMS algorithms during the trot
experiment. Both algorithms result in a similar cost after optimization.

The presented work shows the first application of wholebody NMPC through contacts for dynamic motions. Furthermore, this is the first time that such an approach is
applied to hardware for periodic gait patterns and tasks with
dynamic contact switches. We demonstrate that NMPC can
be run at rates that exceed the state of the art by an order
of magnitude by using an efficient implementation combined
with state-of-the-art software engineering techniques such as
Auto-Diff, symplectic integration as well as vectorization. By
applying our method to two different robots, we show that our
integration with state estimation and controllers allows us to
deploy the approach to different robots with different actuation
principles without major adjustments. The tasks themselves
underline the benefits of running an NMPC controller that
can reason about contacts. When looking e.g. at the trotting
task, we see disturbance-dependent gait pattern changes, base
stabilization and small reactive side stepping. If implemented
with a classical approach the resulting planning and control
pipeline would possible consist of several modules and layers.
Using NMPC they emerge naturally from a single algorithm.
While cost function tuning remains a manual task to achieve
optimal performance, new tasks can be simply tuned in a few
minutes. This way, we avoid designing a control and planning
framework from scratch when the task at hand changes, which
is still often the case in robotics.
While these first results look promising, there is still a
significant amount of future work to be considered, both
from an algorithmic as well as from an implementation point
of view. On the algorithmic side, we plan to leverage the
speed advantage and better warm starting capabilities of
GNMS to extend the time horizon of the NMPC controller.
As part of this work, it would be worthwhile to see how a
larger time horizon influences performance and robustness.
We expect that a longer time horizon could show more
elaborate disturbance rejection and recovery behavior since it
offers more flexibility and predictive capabilities to the solver.
Furthermore, while most tasks by design stayed within the
physical limitations of the platforms, GNMS would allow us
to handle constraints such as torque limitations explicitly as
as inequality constraints. Given that the higher update rate of
GNMS-MPC did not lead to an increase in performance, we
believe that our method can cope with the extra computational
complexity when dealing with constraints, especially since the
algorithm’s complexity remains linear in time. Also, we could
resort to soft-constraints rather than hard constraints [40].
From a practical perspective, we wish to include some model

adaptation or disturbance estimation to our implementation
that robustifies our approach even further. Additionally, this
could help to bring new motions to hardware. Finally, the
NMPC controller could also be used to track and stabilize
motions generated from a high level foothold and motion
planner to handle non-convex terrains.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We wish to thank the entire SYSCOP group at IMTEK at the University
of Freiburg, especially Prof. Moritz Diehl and Dimitris Kouzoupis for their
valuable feedback and Gianluca Frison for his support for interfacing with the
HPIPM solver. Furthermore, our gratitude goes to Marko Bjelonic and Péter
Fankhauser who helped with the experiments. This research is supported by
the Swiss National Science Foundation through the NCCR Digital Fabrication,
the NCCR Robotics and a Professorship Award to Jonas Buchli.

R EFERENCES
[1] A. W. Winkler, C. Mastalli, I. Havoutis, M. Focchi, D. G. Caldwell, and
C. Semini, “Planning and execution of dynamic whole-body locomotion
for a hydraulic quadruped on challenging terrain,” in IEEE International
Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pp. 5148–5154, 2015.
[2] M. Kalakrishnan, J. Buchli, P. Pastor, M. Mistry, and S. Schaal,
“Learning, planning, and control for quadruped locomotion over
challenging terrain,” The International Journal of Robotics Research,
vol. 30, no. 2, pp. 236–258, 2011.
[3] C. Gehring, S. Coros, M. Hutler, C. D. Bellicoso, H. Heijnen,
R. Diethelm, M. Bloesch, P. Fankhauser, J. Hwangbo, M. Hoepflinger,
and R. Siegwart, “Practice makes perfect: An optimization-based
approach to controlling agile motions for a quadruped robot,” IEEE
Robotics Automation Magazine, vol. 23, pp. 34–43, March 2016.
[4] C. Mastalli, I. Havoutis, M. Focchi, D. G. Caldwell, and C. Semini,
“Hierarchical planning of dynamic movements without scheduled
contact sequences,” in IEEE International Conference on Robotics
and Automation (ICRA), pp. 4636–4641, 2016.
[5] H. Dai, A. Valenzuela, and R. Tedrake, “Whole-body motion planning with centroidal dynamics and full kinematics,” in IEEE-RAS
International Conference on Humanoid Robots, pp. 295–302, 2015.
[6] S. Kuindersma, R. Deits, M. Fallon, A. Valenzuela, H. Dai, F. Permenter,
T. Koolen, P. Marion, and R. Tedrake, “Optimization-based locomotion
planning, estimation, and control design for the atlas humanoid robot,”
Autonomous Robots, vol. 40, no. 3, pp. 429–455, 2016.
[7] K. Koyanagi, H. Hirukawa, S. Hattori, M. Morisawa, S. Nakaoka,
K. Harada, and S. Kajita, “A pattern generator of humanoid robots
walking on a rough terrain using a handrail,” in IEEE/RSJ International
Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems, pp. 2617–2622, 2008.
[8] F. Farshidian, M. Neunert, A. W. Winkler, G. Rey, and J. Buchli,
“An efficient optimal planning and control framework for quadrupedal
locomotion,” in IEEE Int. Conf. on Robotics and Automation, 2017.
[9] A. Herzog, N. Rotella, S. Schaal, and L. Righetti, “Trajectory generation
for multi-contact momentum-control,” in IEEE-RAS International
Conference on Humanoid Robots (Humanoids), pp. 874–880, 2015.
[10] K. Mombaur, “Using optimization to create self-stable human-like
running,” Robotica, vol. 27, no. 03, p. 321, 2009.
[11] M. Posa, C. Cantu, and R. Tedrake, “A Direct Method for Trajectory
Optimization of Rigid Bodies Through Contact,” The International
Journal of Robotics Research, vol. 33, no. 1, pp. 69–81, 2014.
[12] Y. Tassa, T. Erez, and E. Todorov, “Synthesis of Robust Behaviors
through Online Trajectory Optimization,” in IEEE/RSJ International
Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems, pp. 4906–4913, 2012.
[13] D. Pardo, M. Neunert, A. W. Winkler, and J. Buchli, “Projection
based whole body motion planning for legged robots,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1510.01625, 2015.
[14] T. Erez, K. Lowrey, Y. Tassa, V. Kumar, S. Kolev, and E. Todorov, “An
integrated system for real-time model predictive control of humanoid
robots,” in IEEE-RAS International Conference on Humanoid Robots
(Humanoids), pp. 292–299, 2013.
[15] J. Koenemann, A. Del Prete, Y. Tassa, E. Todorov, O. Stasse,
M. Bennewitz, and N. Mansard, “Whole-body model-predictive control
applied to the HRP-2 humanoid,” in 2015 IEEE/RSJ International
Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems, pp. 3346–3351, 2015.
[16] “The ‘Control Toolbox’ – An Open Source Library for Robotics and
Optimal Control.” https://adrlab.bitbucket.io/ct, 2017.

[17] M. Neunert, F. Farshidian, A. W. Winkler, and J. Buchli, “Trajectory optimization through contacts and automatic gait discovery for
quadrupeds,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters (RA-L), 2017.
[18] M. Posa, C. Cantu, and R. Tedrake, “A direct method for trajectory
optimization of rigid bodies through contact,” Int. Journal of Robotics
Research, vol. 33, pp. 69–81, Jan. 2014.
[19] D. Ralph and S. J. Wright, “Some properties of regularization and
penalization schemes for mpecs,” Optimization Methods and Software,
vol. 19, no. 5, pp. 527–556, 2004.
[20] G. Bouza and G. Still, “Mathematical programs with complementarity
constraints: convergence properties of a smoothing method,” Mathematics of Operations research, vol. 32, no. 2, pp. 467–483, 2007.
[21] M. Azad and R. Featherstone, “A new nonlinear model of contact
normal force,” IEEE Trans. on Robotics, vol. 30, pp. 736–739, 2014.
[22] M. Giftthaler, M. Neunert, M. Stäuble, M. Frigerio, C. Semini, and
J. Buchli, “Automatic differentiation of rigid body dynamics for optimal
control and estimation,” Advanced Robotics, 2017.
[23] M. Diehl, H. G. Bock, H. Diedam, and P.-B. Wieber, “Fast direct
multiple shooting algorithms for optimal robot control,” in Fast motions
in biomechanics and robotics, pp. 65–93, Springer, 2006.
[24] M. Posa, S. Kuindersma, and R. Tedrake, “Optimization and stabilization of trajectories for constrained dynamical systems,” in IEEE Int.
Conf. on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pp. 1366–1373, 2016.
[25] D. Pardo, L. Möller, M. Neunert, A. W. Winkler, and J. Buchli,
“Evaluating direct transcription and nonlinear optimization methods for
robot motion planning,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, vol. 1,
no. 2, pp. 946–953, 2016.
[26] M. Giftthaler, M. Neunert, M. Stäuble, J. Buchli, and M. Diehl, “A
Family of Iterative Gauss-Newton Shooting Methods for Nonlinear
Optimal Control.” arXiv:1711.11006 [cs.SY], 2017.
[27] E. Todorov and W. Li, “A generalized iterative LQG method for locallyoptimal feedback control of constrained nonlinear stochastic systems,”
in IEEE American Control Conference, pp. 300–306, 2005.
[28] A. Sideris and J. E. Bobrow, “An efficient sequential linear quadratic
algorithm for solving nonlinear optimal control problems,” Transactions
on Automatic Control, vol. 50, no. 12, pp. 2043–2047, 2005.
[29] M. Diehl, H. G. Bock, and J. P. Schlöder, “A real-time iteration scheme
for nonlinear optimization in optimal feedback control,” SIAM Journal
on control and optimization, vol. 43, no. 5, pp. 1714–1736, 2005.
[30] M. Frigerio, J. Buchli, and D. Caldwell, “Code generation of algebraic
quantities for robot controllers,” in Intelligent Robots and Systems
(IROS), 2012 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on, Oct 2012.
[31] E. Catto, “Soft Constraints – Reinventing the Spring.” Game Developmers Conference, 2011.
[32] M. Diehl and S. Gros, Numerical Optimal Control. expected to be
published in 2017.
[33] A. Prabhakar, K. Flakamp, and T. D. Murphey, “Symplectic integration
for optimal ergodic control,” in 2015 54th IEEE Conference on Decision
and Control (CDC), pp. 2594–2600, Dec 2015.
[34] N. Firasta, M. Buxton, P. Jinbo, K. Nasri, and S. Kuo, “Intel avx: New
frontiers in performance improvements and energy efficiency,” Intel
white paper, vol. 19, p. 20, 2008.
[35] G. Guennebaud, B. Jacob, et al., “Eigen v3.” http://eigen.tuxfamily.org.
[36] C. Semini, N. G. Tsagarakis, E. Guglielmino, M. Focchi, F. Cannella,
and D. G. Caldwell, “Design of HyQ–a hydraulically and electrically
actuated quadruped robot,” Institution of Mechanical Engineers, Journal
of Systems and Control Engineering, vol. 225, pp. 831–849, 2011.
[37] M. Hutter, C. Gehring, D. Jud, A. Lauber, C. D. Bellicoso, V. Tsounis,
J. Hwangbo, K. Bodie, P. Fankhauser, M. Bloesch, R. Diethelm, S. Bachmann, A. Melzer, and M. Hoepflinger, “Anymal - a highly mobile
and dynamic quadrupedal robot,” in 2016 IEEE/RSJ International
Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems, pp. 38–44, Oct 2016.
[38] J. Pratt, C.-M. Chew, A. Torres, P. Dilworth, and G. Pratt, “Virtual
model control: An intuitive approach for bipedal locomotion,” The
International Journal of Robotics Research, vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 129–143,
2001.
[39] M. Bloesch, M. Hutter, M. Hoepflinger, S. Leutenegger, C. Gehring,
C. D. Remy, and R. Siegwart, “State estimation for legged robotsconsistent fusion of leg kinematics and imu,” RSS Robotics Science
and Systems, 2012.
[40] M. Neunert, F. Farshidian, and J. Buchli, “Efficient whole-body
trajectory optimization using contact constraint relaxation,” in IEEERAS International Conference on Humanoid Robots, pp. 43–48, 2016.

