Highly Dynamic Quadruped Locomotion via
Whole-Body Impulse Control and Model Predictive Control

arXiv:1909.06586v1 [cs.RO] 14 Sep 2019

Donghyun Kim1 , Jared Di Carlo2 , Benjamin Katz1 , Gerardo Bledt1 , and Sangbae Kim1
Abstract— Dynamic legged locomotion is a challenging topic
because of the lack of established control schemes which can
handle aerial phases, short stance times, and high-speed leg
swings. In this paper, we propose a controller combining wholebody control (WBC) and model predictive control (MPC). In
our framework, MPC finds an optimal reaction force profile
over a longer time horizon with a simple model, and WBC
computes joint torque, position, and velocity commands based
on the reaction forces computed from MPC. Unlike existing
WBCs, which attempt to track commanded body trajectories,
our controller is focused more on the reaction force command,
which allows it to accomplish high speed dynamic locomotion
with aerial phases. The newly devised WBC is integrated
with MPC and tested on the Mini-Cheetah quadruped robot.
To demonstrate the robustness and versatility, the controller
is tested on six different gaits in a number of different
environments, including outdoors and on a treadmill, reaching
a top speed of 3.7 m/s.

I. I NTRODUCTION
To fully exploit the hardware capability of legged systems,
we need a controller that can address the challenging issues
related to dynamic locomotion, such as body control during
short stance periods, aerial phases, and high speed swing leg
motion control. Several successful cases for both running
bipeds [1], [2] and quadrupeds [3] have been presented, but
they are either difficult to scale up to high degree-of-freedom
systems [1] or heavily rely on specific system dynamics [2]
or are undocumented [3]. Whole-body control (WBC) is a
strong candidate as a dynamic motion controller because of
its dynamically consistent formulation and general framework, which makes it easy to extend to various systems and
tasks. However, existing WBCs focus on how to follow the
given trajectory by manipulating contact forces, which makes
it nontrivial to address motion involving frequent non-contact
phases such as high speed running.
To tackle the issue, we formulate WBC to follow both
the reaction force and body trajectory commands. The idea
of reaction force tracking originates from the impulse planning used in Cheetah 2 [4], which demonstrates successful
dynamic bounding and jumping. The underlying idea of [4]
is to plan reaction forces, which are impulses, rather than
CoM trajectory, which is not practical to follow when the
locomotion is extremely dynamic and has significant periods
of under-actuation. In this paper, we embrace the impulse
planning idea in WBC and formulate whole-body impulse
Authors are with the 1 Department of Mechanical Engineering at the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, and the 2 Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science at the Massachusetts Institute
of Technology, Cambridge, MA, 02139, USA. Corresponding Author:

robot.dhkim@gmail.com

Actual robot (Mini-Cheetah)
WBC (0.5kHz)

MPC (0.04kHz)

Full body dynamics

Simplified model
Fig. 1. Control Architecture. The proposed control architecture consists
of two parts: Model predictive control and whole-body control. The reaction
forces computed by MPC are modified by WBC to incorporate body
stabilization and swing leg control. The final commands found in WBC
are sent to the robot to perform dynamic locomotion.

control (WBIC) that can incorporate both body posture stabilization and reaction force execution. In terms of formulation,
WBIC is not significantly different from the existing wholebody controllers [5]–[7], but the additional feature, which is
an incorporation of pre-computed reaction forces by relaxing
the floating base control, plays an important role in dynamic
locomotion control. In our formulation, the WBIC is mostly
used to track the ground reaction force profile rather than a
body trajectory.
To find the reaction force command, we utilize model
predictive control (MPC). In our previous work, we demonstrated that convex MPC can perform various dynamic gaits
at high speed on both Cheetah 3 [8] and Mini-Cheetah [9].
Utilization of MPC enhances the versatility of locomotion,
enabling us to switch between various gaits by simply
changing the contact sequence. However, using MPC with
a simple model has a fundamental limitation in position
control because of its low update frequency (40 Hz in our
implementations) and model simplifications. WBC provides
a solution to the MPC’s limitation by running a highfrequency feedback loop while still accounting for full-body
dynamics with contact.
On the other hand, the prediction horizon of MPC compliments the WBC perfectly to fill in the WBC’s limitation that it cannot consider more than a single time step
ahead. This limited time horizon issue has been addressed
in [10], [11] which developed an MPC formulation using
full-body dynamics. However, even their highly optimized
solvers barely fit into a 200 Hz update frequency and the

User input

Model predictive control
(Gait scheduler/Step planner)

Gait type
Speed cmd
Direction cmd
Body state (

State Estimatior
[ 0.5 kHz ]

[ 0.04 kHz ]

)

Robot Kinematic/
Dynamic Model
[ 0.5 kHz ]
Foot position

Whole-body impulse control

Command
State info.

[ 0.5 kHz ]

Contact states
Reaction force
Foot pos cmd
Body pos cmd

Joint-level control
[ 40 kHz ]
+
+
PD

+
Robot state

-

Robot

Joint position, velocity (encoder)
Angular velocity, linear acceleration (IMU)

Fig. 2. Overall Control Framework. Using the user commanded gait type, speed, and direction from the RC-controller, the MPC computes desired
reaction forces and foot/body position commands. From these, WBC computes joint torque, position, and velocity commands that are delivered to the each
joint-level controller. Each component’s update frequency is represented by the color of its box.

demonstrated results are not very dynamic compared to other
controllers presented on the same robots. We believe that
effective integration of MPC and WBC has a fundamental
benefit over long-time horizon WBC. Moreover, by utilizing
convex optimization, our implementation is not only fast,
but also reliable because the solver does not get stuck in a
strange local minimum.
To integrate the MPC with the WBC, we modified our
previous WBC formulation [5] to be compatible with the
MPC and to handle dynamic locomotion with aerial phases.
However, the novelty of our work does not come from
the integration of two methods, MPC and WBC, since the
incorporation of WBC with a high-level trajectory generator
such as a motion optimizer [12], locomotion planner [13],
[14], or MPC [15] is an established control framework.
Our contribution lies in the method of how we utilize
the results of MPC in the WBC. In our formulation, we
use reaction forces computed by MPC as desired reaction
forces in our WBC rather than attempting to track body
trajectories computed by MPC. This is different from [15]
that forces the robot to follow the CoM trajectory found by
MPC and uses the reaction forces found by MPC only for
regulating internal forces. However, attempting to track a
CoM trajectory with a WBC will not be effective for gaits
like galloping, where the CoM is never controllable. Our
WBIC controls the body posture and swing foot but with a
relaxation variable that allows the floating base movement
to be different from the commanded trajectory. By doing so,
WBC can perform behaviors with uncontrollable center of
mass (CoM), movement such as jumping or bounding, by
controlling the reaction forces found by MPC.
Integrating WBC and MPC makes our controller versatile
and robust. Versatile means that, in our controller, changing
behavior or adding more tasks (e.g. manipulation if there
are additional limbs) can be done by simply re-configuring
the desired motions. For example, selecting different gaits
can be done by changing the footstep pattern and timing in our formulation, and the low-level details such as
swing foot control and body stabilization are automatically
accomplished by our control scheme. Our controller will
automatically handle gaits with significant flight periods,
such as hopping, pronking, or bounding, without the need for

manually planning around periods of flight or underactuation.
“Robust” means that our controller is reliable enough to
maintain the robot’s balance while executing a locomotion
command, even in the presence of large disturbances. More
importantly, the proposed method can be implemented and
demonstrates highly dynamic locomotion in a real robot.
In our experiments with the Mini-Cheetah robot, we accomplished a 3.7 m/s running speed, corresponding to a
Froude number of 4.65. Most documented legged robots’
Froude numbers are smaller than 2 [2], [16], except Cheetah
2 demonstrated 6.4m/s bounding (Froude number 7.1) [4].
To the best of our knowledge, our results demonstrate some
of the most agile locomotion of any quadruped robot.
Additionally, in order to successfully implement the algorithm on hardware, we developed an efficient dynamics
engine including rotor dynamics [17] and linear algebra
optimizations through template formatting. These techniques
enable the MPC to run at 30 Hz and WBIC to run at 500 Hz
on the low power computer installed in the Mini-Cheetah
robot. In summary, the major contributions of this paper
are two folds: 1) developing a versatile and robust control
scheme for highly dynamic locomotion of quadruped robots,
and 2) demonstrating high speed running and various gaits
in real hardware, on the Mini-Cheetah robot.
II. H YBRID C ONTROL A RCHITECTURE
The key idea of our method is to reduce complexity by
separating locomotion control into two simpler controllers.
This first controller finds optimal reaction force profiles along
a one full gait cycle of locomotion using an MPC with the
following simple lumped mass model:

mp̈ =

nc
X

fi − cg ,

(1)

i=1
nc
X
d
(Iω) =
ri × fi ,
dt
i=1

(2)

where p, fi , and cg are three dimensional vectors representing the robot’s position, reaction force, and gravitational
acceleration with respect to the global frame. m is the robot’s
body mass and nc is the number of contacts. I ∈ R3×3 is

the rotational inertia tensor and ω is the angular velocity of
the body. ri is the position of i-th contact point with respect
to the CoM of the robot, which is equivalent to the moment
arm of the contact force.
In the second process, we use WBIC to achieve high
bandwidth control through the use of full-body dynamics
and high frequency feedback control. This better dynamics
model will determine more accurate torque commands than
the lumped mass model. The multi-body dynamics can be
written as
 
 
q̈f
06
A
+b+g =
+ Jc> fr ,
(3)
q̈j
τ
where A, b, g, τ , fr , and Jc are the generalized mass matrix,
Coriolis force, gravitation force, joint torque, augmented
reaction force and contact Jacobian, respectively. q̈f ∈ R6
is the acceleration of the floating base and q̈j ∈ Rnj is
the vector of joint accelerations, where nj is the number of
joints. We use 06 to represent a 6 dimensional zero vector
and 0n to represent a n-dimensional zero vector in this paper.
Our hybrid control scheme combining these two controllers is described in Fig. 2. Beside MPC and WBIC,
we use a Kalman Filter-based state estimator to compute
global body position and velocity based on kinematics and
acceleration data. We also developed a custom dynamics
engine that efficiently includes the effects of rotor dynamics
on the mass matrix and Coriolis vector. Although the the
state estimator and dynamics engine contributed significantly
to the locomotion performance, we will not explain them in
detail since they are out of the scope of this paper.
III. M ODEL P REDICTIVE C ONTROL
The objective of our MPC to find reaction forces which
make the lumped mass follow the given trajectory. In the
optimization process of the MPC, a contact sequence is
predefined by the gait scheduler and step planner. This keeps
the formulation convex, meaining the optimization problem
is both fast to solve and can be always solved to a unique
global minimum. This is not always obtainable in nonlinear
optimization.

are the inertia tensor seen from the global and local (body)
frame, respectively.
The second assumption we made is that states are close
to the commanded trajectory. Based on this assumption, we
create a time-varying linearization of the dynamics using
commanded ψ in a rotational matrix, Rz (ψ), and set the
moment arm in Eq. (2) with the predetermined one from
the commanded trajectory and step locations. The last assumption is that the pitch and roll velocities are small and
off-diagonal terms of the inertia tensor are also small. With
the assumption, we approximate Eq. (2) with the following:
d
(Iω) = I ω̇ + ω × (Iω) ≈ I ω̇.
dt

With the above three simplifications, the discrete dynamics
of the system can be expressed as
x(k + 1) = Ak x(k) + Bk f̂ (k) + ĝ,

(7)


>
x = Θ> p> ω > ṗ> ,

>
f̂ = f1 · · · fn ,

>
ĝ = 01×3 01×3 01×3 g> ,

(8)



13×3 03×3 Rz (ψk )∆t
03×3
0
03×3
13×3 ∆t
 3×3 13×3

A=
,
03×3 03×3
13×3
03×3 
03×3 03×3
03×3
13×3


03×3
···
03×3


03×3
···
03×3


B =  −1
.
G I [r1 ]× ∆t · · · G I −1 [rn ]× ∆t
13×3 ∆t/m · · ·
13×3 ∆t/m

(9)

where,

We use the formulation described in [8] to construct a QP
which minimizes

A. MPC Formulation
Even the simple lumped mass model is not completely
linear due to the cross product term for the moment arm
and the orientation dynamics. To accomplish a convex MPC
formulation, we applied three simplifications [8]. The first
assumption is that the roll and pitch angles are small.
Based on this assumption, we can simplify the coordinate
transformation as follows.
Θ̇ ≈ Rz (ψ)ω,

(4)
>

(5)
G I ≈ Rz (ψ)B IRz (ψ) ,

>
where Θ̇ = φ̇ θ̇ ψ̇ is angular velocity of the body with
roll (φ), pitch (θ), and yaw (ψ) Euler angle representation.
Rz (ψ) is a rotation matrix translating angular velocity in the
global frame, ω, to the local (body) coordinate. G I and B I

(6)

min
x,f

m
X

||x(k + 1) − xref (k + 1)||Q + ||f (k)||R

(10)

k=0

subject to dynamics and initial condition constraints. Additionally, friction cones are approximated by the following
ground reaction force constraints
| fx |≤ µfz ,

| fy |≤ µfz ,

fz > 0.

(11)

To reduce the size of the problem, we eliminate variables
which correspond to ground reaction forces for feet which
are not touching the ground. This reduces the size of both the
cost and constraint matrix, and in practice gives us a speed
up of over 10 times. Since all contacts in our problem are
point contacts, we do not need to account for the non-flip
condition that is described in [18].

B. Gait Scheduler
We use a periodic phase-based gait scheduler introduced
in [19] that needs only two parameters to specify a gait
type; phase offset and stance period for each foot. Since
most gaits are basically periodic, proper spacing of swing
and stance period in one cycle is enough to define different
gaits. We can easily change the gait frequency by changing
the cycle duration. Because gaits are defined by a portion
of stance/swing period in the cycle, the gait types are
maintained even when the gait frequency changes.
C. Foot Step Planner
We choose the upcoming foot step location with the
following equation:

utilizing joint position control. WBIC uses similar strategy
to obtain reliable motion stabilization.
Although we take a similar approach to the author’s
previous work [14], we use operational space control instead
of configuration impedance control. We made this change
based on difference between actuators used in each robot:
proprioceptive actuators in Mini-Cheetah and series elastic
actuators in Mercury. Since the proprioceptive actuator is
highly backdrivable and provides open-loop joint torque
control through the motor current control, it is more effective
to directly control operational impedance rather than relying
on joint impedance control that can delay the operational
space control. The following sections explain the formulation
of WBIC in detail.
A. Prioritized Task Execution

rcmd
= pshoulder,i + psymmetry + pcentrifugal ,
i

(12)

where,
pshoulder,i = pk + Rz (ψk ) li ,
psymmetry =
pcentrifugal =


tstance
v + k v − vcmd ,
2
s
1
2

h
v × ω cmd ,
g

(13)
(14)
(15)

In Eq. (13), pk is the body position at the k-th timestep and
li is i-th leg shoulder location with respect to the body’s local
frame. Therefore, pshoulder,i is the i-th shoulder location with
respect to the global frame. psymmetry is a so-called Raibert
heuristic [20] that forces the leg’s landing angle and leaving
angle be identical if the robot is traveling at the commanded
velocity. In our setup, we use 0.03 for the feedback gain, k.
IV. W HOLE -B ODY I MPULSE C ONTROL
Using the reaction forces found by the MPC, the WBIC
computes joint position, velocity, and torque commands. For
joint position, velocity, and acceleration computation, we
utilize an inverse kinematics algorithm that strictly holds task
priority. To compute the torque command, we use quadratic
programming to find the reaction forces, reducing the both
errors in acceleration command tracking and reaction force
command tracking while satisfying inequality constraints on
the resultant reaction forces.
Joint position and velocity commands are used to stabilize
a posture through joint-level position controllers. In addition
to the torque command, which is the final output of common
WBC, WBIC computes a desired joint position and velocity.
Utilizing joint position feedback is beneficial for dynamic
locomotion control because of its collocated control input
and high frequency update. In the case of Mini-Cheetah, the
frequency of joint PD control is 40kHz, which is 80 times
faster than the high-level full body control. The effectiveness
of joint position feedback in whole-body control is well
demonstrated in the author’s previous work, passive-ankle
biped walking [14]. In [14], the robot accomplish the stable
body posture control and accurate swing foot control by

To execute prioritized tasks, we utilize a null-space projection technique, which enables a strict task hierarchy in

>
q>
a computationally efficient way. When q = q>
is
j
f
a vector representing full configuration space, the iteration
rules are the following.
∆qi = ∆qi−1 + Ji|pre † (ei − Ji ∆qi−1 ) ,

†
ẋdes
− Ji q̇cmd
q̇cmd
= q̇cmd
i
i−1 ,
i
i−1 + Ji|pre


dyn
cmd
− J˙i q̇ − Ji q̈cmd
q̈cmd
= q̈cmd
i−1 ,
i
i−1 + Ji|pre ẍi

(16)
(17)
(18)

where
Ji|pre = Ji Ni−1 ,
Ni−1 = N0 N1|0 · · · Ni−1|i−2 ,
N0 = I − Jc† Jc ,
Ni|i−1 = I − Ji|i−1 † Ji|i−1 .

(19)

(20)

Here, i ≥ 1, and
∆q0 , q̇cmd
= 0,
0
q̈cmd
= Jcdyn (−Jc q̇).
0

(21)

cmd
ei is the position error defined by xdes
is the
i − xi and ẍi
acceleration command of i-th task defined by


ẍcmd
= ẍdes + Kp xdes
− xi + Kd ẋdes − ẋ , (22)
i
i

where Kp and Kd are position and velocity feedback gains,
respectively. Note that there is no feedback gain in Eq. (16),
which can be interpreted as using unity gains. Ji|pre is the
projection of the i-th task Jacobian into the null space of
the prior tasks. Jc is a contact Jacobian, which is equivalent
to the Jc in Eq. (3). We use two types of pseudo-inverses;
one is an SVD-based pseudo-inverse denoted by {·}† and the
other is dynamically consistent pseudo-inverse defined by
−1
J = A−1 J > J A−1 J >
.
(23)
When computing acceleration (Eq. (18)), we use the dynamically consistent pseudo-inverse. Therefore, the projected
dyn
Jacobian, Ji|pre
, is different from the ones used in kinematics computations. The dynamically consistent Jacobians

z

use {·} instead of {·}† in the null space matrix computation
(Eq. (20)).
Eq. (16) and (17) are used to find desired joint position and
velocity for joint PD controller, respectively. We compute the
desired joint position by adding the joint position portion of
Eq. (16) to the measured joint position,
qcmd
= qj + ∆qj .
j

(24)

The computed joint commands, qcmd
and q̇cmd
, are sent to
j
j
the joint-level PD controller, and the acceleration commands
q̈cmd are delivered to the QP optimization to find a torque
command.
B. Quadratic Programming
We compute the final reaction force with the acceleration
command found in the previous step and the reaction force
obtained in MPC. For the optimization, we use the opensource QP solver [21] that is efficient for small problems.
The formulation of our QP problem is
min

δfr ,δf

δf>r Q1 δfr + δf> Q2 δf

(25)

q4

q1

q11

q8

q3

q0
x

q5

q2

z
Hind Left (HL)
Hind Right (HR)

y
x

Front Left (FL)
Front Right (FR)

Fig. 3.
Configuration of Mini-Cheetah. Mini-cheetah uses 12 proprioceptive actuators to control 4 limbs. The numbering of joints starts
from right front abduction/adduction joint and progresses to hip and knee
flexion/extension joints.
kp (s−2 )

Task
Body Orientation



100

100

Body Position



100

100

Foot Position



100

100

>
100
>
100
>
100

kd (s−1 )


10

10



10

10



10

10

>
10
>
10
>
10

TASK AND G AIN S ETUP

Sf (Aq̈ + b + g) = Sf Jc> fr
 
δ
q̈ = q̈cmd + f
0nj
W fr ≥ 0,

q7

TABLE I

s.t.

fr = frMPC + δfr

y

(floating base dyn.)
(acceleration)
(reaction forces)

(contact force constraints)

where frMPC and Sf are reaction forces computed by the
MPC and the floating base selection matrix, respectively.
Jc and W are the augmented contact Jacobian and contact
constraint matrix that are equivalent to the terms used in
Eq. (3) and Eq. (10), respectively. δf and δfr are relaxation
variables for the floating base acceleration and reaction
forces.
Because of the relaxation of floating base acceleration,
task accelerations can differ from the ones computed in
Section. IV-A. The difference is intended to allow for the
base to be uncontrolled during a flight phase, but has a risk
to introduce tracking errors to other tasks. We ignore the
effect on the other tasks because changing task commands
as a response of the unpredictable floating base motion is not
desirable in the real hardware control. For example, when a
robot jumps, we need to address a floating base acceleration
in the computation of foot acceleration command to keep the
strict task priority. However, in most real hardware experiments, considering a floating base acceleration incorporating
with complex dynamics and gravitational force does not help
enhancing the swing foot control. Therefore, we simply relax
the floating base dynamics rather than strictly govern the
prioritized task execution by utilizing complex algorithms
such as hierarchical quadratic programming [22].
The last step of WBIC is to compute a torque command
from the reaction forces, fr , and the configuration space

acceleration, q̈. By plugging these two terms into Eq. (3),
we obtain
 
τf
= Aq̈ + b + g − Jc> fr .
(26)
τj
Since all terms on the right hand side are known, we can
easily solve it and obtain the joint torque command, τj .
V. E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS
The Mini-Cheetah robot [23] is used to verify the effectiveness of the proposed controller. The task setup and feedback gains of WBIC used in the experiments are summarized
in Table. I. The tasks are listed in order of priority. In the QP
problem, the weight for the reaction force (Q1 ) is 1 and the
weight for the floating base control (Q2 ) is 0.1. Every joint
feedback controller shares the same gains, kp = 3 N m/rad
and kd = 0.3 N m s/rad, except abduction joints, which
have a higher derivative gain, 1. The same parameter and
task setup is used over all tests. The labels of feet and joints
used in the description coincide with the labels depicted in
Fig. 3. A video recording of the experiments can be found
in https://youtu.be/6JlVol3eyNI.
A. High Speed Running
In our previous work [9], Mini-Cheetah accomplished the
running speed of 2.45 m/s in maximum. Considering the size
of the robot, the speed is comparable to the state-of-the-art
such as WildCat (8 m/s) and Cheetah 2 (6.4 m/s), but was
limited by the stability of the previous MPC-only controller,
rather than the Mini-Cheetah hardware. Our new controller
combining MPC and WBIC achieves a maximum forward

measured
commanded

measured
commanded

(a) Mini-Cheetah running

(b) Body velocity
measured
commanded

(c) Joint velocity (FL)
WBIC
MPC

torque
power

(d) Body height and orientation

(e) Reaction force (FL)

(d) Joint torque and power (FL)

Fig. 4. Running Experiment. Mini-Cheetah trots at 3.7m/s. (b) The observed maximum speed is 4 m/s but the robot quickly lost its balance after
reaching this speed. The highest stable speed reached was is 3.7 m/s. (c) and (d) show the joint velocity, torque, and power. We only include data from
three joints (abduction, hip, and knee) from the front left leg, but the other legs are similar. From the observed maximum velocity, torque, and power, we
can see that our controller utilizes maximum hardware capacity of Mini-Cheetah. (d) and (e) show how the trajectory and reaction forces tracking work
together to accomplish dynamic running. The robot’s height goes up and down around the constant height command while making jumps and landing,
which is accomplished by following the vertical reaction force command (fz ). (e) Reaction forces computed by MPC update only 4 times during a stance
period, but WBIC computes the forces every 2 ms and makes a modification from the force commands to control body posture and swing feet.

velocity of 3.7 m/s, which is one of the fastest untethered
quadruped robot running speed.
For high speed running, we add one more feature in the
step location algorithm. As the speed goes up, Mini-Cheetah
narrows the step-width of the front feet and widens the hind
feet to avoid collisions between the front and hind legs.
Fig. 4(a) shows that the right front leg and right hind legs
are crossed but do not collide with each other because of the
step-width adjustment.
Fig. 4 summarizes the test results of a high speed running
on a treadmill. The robot’s velocity estimated by the local
foot speed and accelerometer is presented in Fig. 4(b). The
maximum velocity we observed is 4 m/s, but the robot falls
over right after the speed. Therefore it is more reasonable to
see 3.7 m/s as our record. Fig. 4(c) and (d) show how each
joint operates during the high speed running. The maximum
joint velocity and torque at the hip joints are 34 rad/s
and 25.5 N m, respectively. Considering that the maximum
joint velocity and torque are 40 rad/s and 17 N m, we can
conclude that the hardware capability is fully utilized in the
test. The maximum capacity utilization is also confirmed
by the power output presented in Fig. 4(d), which records
280 W, which is larger than the maximum actuator power,
250 W, specified in [9]. Note that the torque presented in the
data is not measured joint torque but commanded torque to
motor controller. Therefore, it can have larger number than
the actuator limit, and in that case when the commanded
torque is larger than the limit, the actuator output is truncated
by the maximum output torque.
Fig. 4(d) and (e) show how the trajectory and reaction
force tracking cooperate together to perform high speed
running including aerial phase. The command for body

posture is constant, which is the same command as for
MPC, but WBIC does not force the robot to exactly follow
the commanded trajectory. Instead, WBIC finds the solution
satisfying the reaction force commands computed by MPC
while controlling the body posture and swing feet as much as
possible. Therefore, the measured height and pitch in Fig.(d)
goes up and down around the constant commands since the
robot jumps and lands as MPC plans.

B. Outdoor Test
Fig. 5 shows outdoor dynamic locomotion of various gait
types. In the test, we use the same gains and weights over all
gait types as we mentioned above. Over the entire outdoor
test, the only inputs that we provide to the controller are
gait type, running speed and direction, and all of them are
transferred to the robot through a remote controller. Fig. 5
is a summary of the outdoor test. As the results show, our
controller is capable of performing the various gaits in a
stable and robust way. The robot follows the commanded
velocity and direction well as can be seen in Fig. 5(c).
Mini-Cheetah can run at speeds over 1 m/s with every gait
type. Fig. 5(b) shows that our controller commands correct
reaction force profiles as a desired gait type is changed.
The controller is also robust to different terrain types. The
green field was wet and slippery because of the rain from the
day before the test, but Mini-Cheetah stably keeps its body
posture and accurately controls the swing legs. The robot
can also run over the gravel terrain, which has significant
roughness and rolling elements that cause body and step
control to be difficult.

Gallop

FR
FL

measured
commanded

Trot

Pacing

Bounding

Pronking

HR
HL

(a) Snap shots

(b) Vertical reaction force

(c) Direction and Yaw

Fig. 5. Demonstration of Various Gaits. Our controller can demonstrate various dynamic running by switching the gait types. (b) The commanded
vertical reaction forces are presented. (c) The commanded velocity and direction are presented with the measured velocity and yaw angle. The results show
that the actual system follows the given commands well.

VI. C ONCLUSION AND D ISCUSSION
In this paper, we propose a new control scheme that
can accomplish various dynamic locomotion of a quadruped
robot with minimal user intervention. The effective combination of MPC and WBC is verified by the experimental
results on the Mini-Cheetah robot. We accomplish high
speed running up to 3.7 m/s by fully utilizing the hardware
capability. In the outdoor tests, Mini-Cheetah demonstrates
various gaits with speed over 1 m/s and push-recovery on
rough terrain.
The immediate next step will be an implementation of the
identical control framework to Cheetah 3 robot. We expect
that no additional work is required for the implementation
since the formulation is independent from the system parameters. Simple switch of system dynamics will enable high
performance locomotion on Cheetah 3. A more interesting
extension will be adding manipulation tasks on the cheetah
robots with an additional manipulator. Although we do not
mention various tasks except locomotion, WBC is naturally
applicable to loco-manipulation tasks. With a small addition

to the current scheme, our controller will be able to manage
both locomotion and manipulation.
The proposed control scheme does not have a limitation
not only in the task types but also for a topology of
the target system. Therefore, we can apply this method to
biped locomotion. We plan to extend our controller to biped
walking and running in the near future with small additions
such as a new contact sequence and step location planner.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by the National Science Foundation [NSF- IIS-1350879], Naver Labs, and the Air Force
Office of Scientific Research.
R EFERENCES
[1] K. Sreenath, H.-W. Park, I. Poulakakis, and J. Grizzle, “Embedding
active force control within the compliant hybrid zero dynamics to
achieve stable, fast running on MABEL,” International Journal of
Robotics Research, vol. 32, no. 3, Mar. 2013.

[2] C. Hubicki, A. Abate, P. Clary, S. Rezazadeh, M. Jones, A. Peekema,
J. Van Why, R. Domres, A. Wu, W. Martin, H. Geyer, and J. Hurst,
“Walking and Running with Passive Compliance: Lessons from Engineering: A Live Demonstration of the ATRIAS Biped,” IEEE Robotics
& Automation Magazine, vol. 25, no. 3, pp. 23–39, Sep. 2016.
[3] B. Dynamics. Introducing wildcat. Boston Dynamics. [Online].
Available: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wE3fmFTtP9g
[4] H.-W. Park, P. M. Wensing, and S. Kim, “High-speed bounding
with the MIT Cheetah 2: Control design and experiments:,” The
International Journal of Robotics Research, vol. 36, no. 2, pp. 167–
192, Mar. 2017.
[5] D. Kim, J. Lee, J. Ahn, O. Campbell, H. Hwang, and L. Sentis,
“Computationally-Robust and Efficient Prioritized Whole-Body Controller with Contact Constraints,” in IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), 2018.
[6] B. Henze, M. A. Roa, and C. Ott, “Passivity-based whole-body
balancing for torque-controlled humanoid robots in multi-contact
scenarios,” The International Journal of Robotics Research, p.
0278364916653815, Jul. 2016.
[7] L. Righetti and S. Schaal, “Quadratic programming for inverse dynamics with optimal distribution of contact forces,” in 12th International
Conference on Humanoid Robots (Humanoids). IEEE, 2012, pp.
538–543.
[8] J. Di Carlo, P. M. Wensing, B. Katz, G. Bledt, and S. Kim, “Dynamic
Locomotion in the MIT Cheetah 3 Through Convex Model-Predictive
Control,” in IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots
and Systems (IROS). IEEE, 2018, pp. 1–9.
[9] B. Katz, J. Di Carlo, and S. Kim, “Mini Cheetah - A Platform for
Pushing the Limits of Dynamic Quadruped Control.” in International
Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), 2019.
[10] M. Neunert, M. Stäuble, M. Giftthaler, C. D. Bellicoso, J. Carius,
C. Gehring, M. Hutter, and J. Buchli, “Whole-Body Nonlinear Model
Predictive Control Through Contacts for Quadrupeds ,” IEEE Robotics
and Automation Letters, vol. 3, Jul. 2018.
[11] J. Koenemann, A. del Prete, Y. Tassa, E. Todorov, O. Stasse, M. Bennewitz, and N. Mansard, “Whole-body model-predictive control applied to the HRP-2 humanoid,” 2015 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), pp. 3346–3351, Sep.
2015.
[12] S. Feng, E. Whitman, X. Xinjilefu, and C. G. Atkeson, “Optimizationbased Full Body Control for the DARPA Robotics Challenge,” Journal
of Field Robotics, vol. 32, no. 2, pp. 293–312, Mar. 2015.
[13] T. Koolen, S. Bertrand, G. Thomas, T. De Boer, T. Wu, J. Smith,
J. Englsberger, and J. Pratt, “Design of a Momentum-Based Control
Framework and Application to the Humanoid Robot Atlas,” International Journal of Humanoid Robotics, vol. 13, no. 01, pp. 1 650 007–
35, Mar. 2016.
[14] D. Kim, S. Jorgensen, J. Lee, J. Ahn, J. Luo, and L. Sentis, “Dynamic
Locomotion For Passive-Ankle Biped Robots And Humanoids Using
Whole-Body Locomotion Control,” arXiv.org, Jan. 2019.
[15] R. Grandia, F. Farshidian, A. Dosovitskiy, R. Ranftl, and M. Hutter,
“Frequency-Aware Model Predictive Control,” IEEE Robotics and
Automation Letters, vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 1517–1524, Apr. 2019.
[16] J. Hwangbo, J. Lee, A. Dosovitskiy, D. Bellicoso, V. Tsounis,
V. Koltun, and M. Hutter, “Learning agile and dynamic motor skills
for legged robots,” Science Robotics, vol. 4, no. 26, p. eaau5872, 2019.
[17] A. Jain, Robot and Multibody Dynamics, ser. Analysis and Algorithms.
Boston, MA: Springer Science & Business Media, Dec. 2010.
[18] S. Caron, Q.-C. Pham, and Y. Nakamura, “Stability of Surface
Contacts for Humanoid Robots: Closed-Form Formulae of the Contact
Wrench Cone for Rectangular Support Areas,” arXiv.org, Jan. 2015.
[19] G. Bledt, P. M. Wensing, S. Ingersoll, and S. Kim, “Contact model
fusion for event-based locomotion in unstructured terrains,” in IEEE
International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), May
2018, pp. 1–8.
[20] M. H. Raibert, H. B. Brown, and M. Chepponis, “Experiments in
Balance with a 3D One-Legged Hopping Machine,” The International
Journal of Robotics Research, vol. 3, no. 2, pp. 75–92, 1984.
[21] D. Goldfarb and A. Idnani, “A numerically stable dual method for
solving strictly convex quadratic programs,” Mathematical Programming, vol. 27, no. 1, pp. 1–33, Sep. 1983.
[22] A. Escande, N. Mansard, and P.-B. Wieber, “Hierarchical quadratic
programming: Fast online humanoid-robot motion generation,” The
International Journal of Robotics Research, vol. 33, no. 7, pp. 1006–
1028, 2014.

[23] B. G. Katz, “A Low Cost Modular Actuator for Dynamic Robots,”
Master’s thesis, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 2018.

