Preprints of the 19th World Congress
The International Federation of Automatic Control
Cape Town, South Africa. August 24-29, 2014

Robust Position Tracking Control and
Ground Contact Detection of a
Cheetaroid-I Leg by a Disturbance
Observer
Jungsu Choi, Byeonghun Na, Sehoon Oh, and Kyoungchul Kong ∗
∗

Department of Mechanical Engineering, Sogang University, Seoul,
Korea (Tel: +82-2-705-4766; e-mail: kckong@sogang.ac.kr).

Abstract: Quadruped robot systems are being intensively investigated as a new means of
transportation systems with multi-purposes. As the operation conditions of such systems, such
as a payload and gait speed, are demanding, the control of the robotic legs is challenging.
In addition, the dynamics of such systems is subjected to large disturbances and parameter
variations due to the ground contact and the complicated mechanical structure. In this paper,
a robust control algorithm based on a disturbance observer (DOB) is proposed for the control
of legs of a quadruped robot, Cheetaroid-I. The DOB enables rejecting disturbances caused by
the ground contact, payload, etc, and detecting the ground contact without force sensors. The
proposed method is veriﬁed by experimental results.
1. INTRODUCTION
Importance of robotic systems has risen in the modern
society. Their applications have been extended to not only
industrial automation, but also the daily life of humans (K.
Kong et al. [2012]). Various robots have been developed
for helping humans in recent years. With a great amount
of government support, many researchers are making their
best eﬀorts to develop robot systems that can replace the
role of humans in hazardous and dangerous environments,
in particular the disastrous areas by a nuclear accident
(J. Savall et al. [1999], K. Nagatani et al. [2011], and
K. Kaneko. [2012]). Considering the required dexterousness and agility of robot systems, legged locomotion
systems are being intensively investigated. In particular,
quadruped robots are receiving great attention as a new
means of transportation for various purposes, such as
military, welfare, and rehabilitation systems. The use of
four legs enables a robustly stable gait; compared to the
humanoid robots, the quadruped robots are particularly
advantageous in improving the locomotion speed, the maximum payload, and the robustness toward disturbances,
e.g., refer to M. Raibert et al. [2008], M. A. Lewis et al.
[2011], and B. Na et al. [2013].
The more demanding conditions robots are exposed to,
however, the more challenging the control of robotic legs
becomes. As the gait speed increases, the frequency bandwidth of reference signals (i.e., desired motions) is also
signiﬁcantly enlarged. Thus the signiﬁcant enlargement of
closed-loop bandwidth of a control system is necessary.
Consequently, high gain control with a high-speed data
acquisition system is unavoidable, which also necessitates
the accurate measurement of physical states without noise.
⋆ This work was supported by the National Research Foundation of
Korea (NRF) grant funded by the Korea government (MSIP) (NRF2012R1A1A1008271).

Copyright © 2014 IFAC

Moreover, the dynamics of a robotic leg is highly uncertain and time-varying due to the ground contact and
the ground condition, as well as the unknown payload.
Therefore, a control algorithm that can achieve both great
control performance and stability robustness is essential
for the eﬀective control of a quadruped robot.
In this paper, a robust control algorithm is proposed
for a high-speed quadruped robot, Cheetaroid-I. The
Cheetaroid-I is a bio-inspired robot system, the skeletal
structure of which is inspired from animals that run fast.
The leg system of Cheetaroid-I, which consists of three
active joints, is particularly designed for improved gaitstability during a high-speed locomotion. The control of
the Cheetaroid-I leg, however, is challenging because of the
large weight of the robot body, the model change due to the
ground contact, the high-frequency reference trajectory,
and so on. In order to achieve great control performance
rejecting the disturbances from the ground and the model
change, a disturbance observer (DOB) is utilized in the
control of a Cheetaroid-I leg system in this paper.
The DOB estimates external disturbances by comparing
an actual measurement with a simulated output. By ﬁltering the output discrepancy with an inverse of the system model, the estimation of the exogenous disturbance
is achieved (K. Ohnishi. [1987] and K. Fujiyama et al.
[1998]). The DOB can also be applied as a feedback controller, in which case the disturbance is rejected and the
overall system is controlled to follow the nominal model,
as reported in the papers of (K. Kong et al. [2009], T.
Umeno et al. [1991], and S. Oh et al. [2013]). Since it
attenuates the model change and makes the closed-loop
system robust toward the external disturbances, the DOB
is appropriate for the Cheetaroid-I leg control. For the
appropriate design of the DOB (i.e., appropriate selection
of a nominal plant structure and its parameters), reliable
knowledge on the nominal plant dynamics and the range

7246

19th IFAC World Congress
Cape Town, South Africa. August 24-29, 2014

Shoulder
(active for
forward/backward
elevation)

Waist
(active for forward/backward
and lateral bending)

A BLDC motor
A control unit

A gear-box (gear ratio = 50:1)
A high-torque timing belt
(Speed reduction ratio = 2:1)
Potentiometer

Linear actuator

Linear
actuator
Elbow (active for
flextion/extension)

Compliant foot system

Hip
(active for
flexion/
extension)
(a)

Stifle (active for
flextion/extension)
Carbon-fiber foot

Fig. 1. Conﬁguration of Cheetaroid-I.
of dynamics variation is required, which is challenging in
practice.
In this paper, the dynamic model of a Cheetaroid-I leg
system is analyzed, and the nominal plant model and the
range of model variations are obtained through extensive
experiments. The implementation of the DOB, however,
requires extra care due to the unstable zero of the plant
dynamics. Therefore, the parameters of the nominal plant
model are further optimized considering the closed-loop
stability of the DOB, as well as the closed-loop performance. The proposed model optimization process enables
the eﬀective control of the robotic leg without performance
degradation even in the presence of an unstable zero in the
nominal plant model, which is the case of Cheetaroid-I.
In addition to robust stabilization and disturbance rejection, the DOB is also utilized to detect the ground contact,
which is necessary information for a higher level motion
control algorithm. While the majority of the disturbances
estimated by the DOB is due to the ground contact, observation of the ground contact is available by monitoring
the magnitude of the estimated disturbance. Consequently,
the proposed control system enables both eﬀective control
of a Cheetaroid-I leg system and removal of force sensors
for detecting the ground contact.

2. CHEETAROID-I ROBOT SYSTEM
2.1 System Configuration
Cheetaroid-I is a quadruped robot that has fourteen degrees of freedom (DoFs), which include three DoFs in
each leg system and two DoFs at the waist, as shown
in Fig. 1. It is capable of generating various locomotion
types, such as diﬀerent gait phases, gyrations, and so on.
The hip and shoulder joints are equipped with customized
linear actuators that exhibit high power output with low
mechanical impedance. For the details on the design of
Cheetaroid-I (B. Na et al. [2013]).

(b)

Fig. 2. The schematic of a leg system; (a): design of a hind
leg, and (b): a simpliﬁed model for dynamics analysis.
2.2 Modeling of a Leg System
Each of the Cheetaroid-I legs has three actuators; one
for the ﬂexion/extension of the hip/shoulder joint, one at
the stiﬂe/elbow joint, and one for the abduction/abuction
movements. The upper leg is composed of thin aluminum
frames with carbon-ﬁber-reinforced-plastic (CFRP) housings, so that it is rigid. On the other hand, the lower leg
is made of compliant CFRP material for the absorption of
impacts due to the ground contact. Figure 2(a) shows the
design of a leg system. As shown in the ﬁgure, the proximal
joint (i.e., the hip or the shoulder joint) is actuated by a
powerful linear actuator. On the other hand, the distal
joint (i.e., the stiﬂe or the elbow joint) is actuated by
a compact and light-weight brushless DC motor (50W,
Maxon Motor Co.) for the sake of the minimal moment of
inertia of the leg system. In addition, the motor is installed
near the proximal joint, while the actuation torque is
transferred via a timing belt. This design provides the
great controllability of a distal joint (i.e., the angular
position of the foot system) while reducing the moment
of inertia of the upper leg part.
The compliance of the timing belt, however, creates a
challenge in the control, since it is placed between the

7247

19th IFAC World Congress
Cape Town, South Africa. August 24-29, 2014

motor, where a control input takes place, and the joint,
where the output is measured. The compliance increases
the order of the plant model (i.e., the number of poles
in the plant transfer functions) and also imposes zeros
occasionally. Notice that the equations of motion of the
motor and the foot system are respectively

−70

Magnitude [dB]

−80

(1)

and
Is (θ̈dis +θ̈prox )+cp θ̇dis +ms gls sin(θdis +θprox ) = τ +d (2)
where τ = k(θm − θdis ) is the torque transmitted by
the timing belt, and d = dGN D ls sin(θdis + θprox ) +
f (θ̈prox , θ̇prox ) is the disturbances due to the ground contact and the motion of the upper leg part. Although the
equations of motion in (1) and (2) are subjected to large
disturbances and model discrepancies due to the inherent
complexity of a robot system, transfer functions can be
obtained rearranging and linearizing the equations above,
i.e.
θdis (s) = Gu→θdis u(s)+Gθprox →θdis θprox (s)+GdG →θdis d(s)
(3)
where θdis (s), u(s), θprox (s), d(s) are the Laplace transforms of θdis (t), u(t), θprox (t), d(t), respectively. Notice
that the angular position of the distal joint, i.e., θdis ,
is inﬂuenced by the motion of the upper part and the
disturbances, as well as the control input, u. Assuming
that the second and third terms on the right-hand-side
of (3) are disturbances to be rejected, the structure of a
nominal plant dynamics (i.e., Gu→θdis ) can be obtained.
Rearranging (1) and (2), one can easily ﬁnd that Gu→θdis
is a fourth-order transfer function with no zero.
Among the three active DoFs in each leg of the CheetaroidI, the control method for distal joint (i.e., the elbow/stiﬂe
joint) is introduced in this paper.

−90
−100
−110
−120
−130
−140

1

2

10

10
Frequency [rad/sec]

(a)

0
−100
Phase [deg]

Im θ̈m + k(θm − θdis ) = u

−60

−200
−300
−400
−500
1

2

10

10
Frequency [rad/sec]

(b)

Fig. 3. System identiﬁcation experiments and a nominal
plant model; (a): magnitudes, and (b): phases.

Gu→θdis =

78
s4 + 101s3 + 3275s2 + 35360s + 16880

(4)

The frequency response of the obtained nominal plant
model in (4) is also shown in Fig. 3 [see the continuous
lines in the ﬁgure].

2.3 System Identification of a Nominal Plant Dynamics
In order to identify the parameters of Gu→θdis , system
identiﬁcation experiments were carried out. In the experiments, the control input, u(t), was the pulse width
in the range of [−20000, 20000], and the output was the
stiﬂe/elbow joint angle in the unit of radians. Eight sets
of experiments were conducted with diﬀerent input magnitudes. Each set of experiments consisted of sinusoidal
waves with diﬀerent frequencies. Once a set of experimental data was obtained, both the input and output signals
were Fourier-transformed, and frequency responses were
obtained by comparing the input and output signals in
the frequency domain.
Figure 3 shows the experimental results. It should be
noted that the magnitudes and phases did not exactly
match as the input magnitude changed. This implies that
the system has nonlinearities or time-varying components.
In particular, the model variation was signiﬁcant at low
and high frequencies, where the low frequency uncertainty
was mainly due to the friction of the joint, and that of
the high frequency was due to the inaccuracy of sensor
measurement, noise, and so on. Consequently, a band is
formed [see the circles in the ﬁgure] and the parameters
of Gu→θdis was obtained considering the magnitude and
phase bands as

2.4 Identification of Dynamics Uncertainties
Since both the nominal plant model and experimental data
are available, multiplicative uncertainties can be obtained
by
∆(jw) =

Gexp (jw) − Gu→θdis (jw)
Gu→θdis (jw)

(5)

The calculated ∆(jw) for every experiment in Fig. 3 is
shown in Fig. 4. It should be noted that the magnitudes
of the model mismatch are large at high frequencies. For
the simplicity of the uncertainty modeling, it is assumed
that ∆ ∈ {W ∆; W ∈ S, ∥∆∥∞ < 1}, where W (s) is
a minimum-phase transfer function that represents the
upper bound of multiplicative uncertainties at each frequency. Then, the upper bound of the multiplicative uncertainties can be modeled based on the experimental fata
shown in Fig. 4, i.e.,
W (s) =

0.011s2 + 1.011s + 22.933
s + 30.000

(6)

The magnitude of W (jw) is also shown in Fig. 4 [see the
continuous line].

7248

19th IFAC World Congress
Cape Town, South Africa. August 24-29, 2014

5

Magnitude [dB]

Uncertainty [dB]

The magnitude of the inverse W(jw)
The magnitude of the Q−filter

5

0
−5
−10
−15

0

−5

−10
−20
1

−15

2

10

10

Inverse
Kinematics

2

10
Frequency [rad/sec]

Fig. 4. The upper bound of the multiplicative uncertainties.

stance
swing

1

10

Frequency [rad/sec]

Fig. 6. The magnitudes of the inverse W (jw) and the Qﬁlter.
Note that Q(s) in (7) has the cutoﬀ frequency of 10 Hz
and the magnitude of 1 at low frequencies. Also, it has the
robust stability margin of at least 3 dB for all frequencies,
as shown in Fig. 6. For the implementation of Q(s), an
equivalent ﬁlter in the discrete time domain, i.e., Q(z),
can be obtained by the pole-zero matching method.

Feed
Forward

DOB
Moving
Average

3.3 Disturbance Observer Stabilization

Fig. 5. The block diagram of the disturbance observer.
3. DISTURBANCE OBSERVER DESIGN FOR LEG
CONTROL
3.1 Overall Controller Structure
The overall control algorithm includes a feedforward ﬁlter,
the feedback controller, and the DOB, as shown in Fig 5.
Since the DOB is not a tracking controller, the feedback
(PD) controller is applied as an outer loop of the DOB. If
the plant has unstable poles, careful consideration should
take place in the design of the controller. In the leg of
the Cheetaroid-I, the plant dynamics does not possess any
poles outside of the unit circle on the z-plane. On the
other hand, the reference trajectory of the Cheetaroid-I is
generated by inverse kinematics. Since the reference trajectory is generated by considering only the possibility of
locomotion, the drastically changing moments exist in the
reference trajectory. Therefore, the derivative controller
calculates the control input by using only the output of the
plant. Assuming that the DOB loop behaves as its nominal
model, the feedforward controller is designed based on the
closed-loop characteristics formed by the PD controller
and the nominal model. A moving average ﬁlter is used
to reduced the sensor noise.
3.2 Design of a Q-filter

The nominal plant model, Gu→θdis (s), is discretized for
implementation. The discretized nominal plant model is
10−7 (0.267z 3 + 2.408z 2 + 1.969z + 0.146)
Gu→θdis (z) = 4
z − 3.152z 3 + 3.692z 2 − 1.906z + 0.366
(8)
Note that zeros of Gu→θdis (z) placed at −0.082, −0.818,
and −8.134, and an unstable zero is introduced during
discretization. In the DOB loop, since the inversed nominal
plant, G−1
u→θdis (z), is used for estimation of the disturbance, the unstable zero of Gu→θdis (z) may introduce
in stability into the DOB loop. Therefore, the unstable
zero derived from discretization should be removed for the
stability of the DOB. In this aspect, a modiﬁed nominal
plant model, Gmod (z), is
10−7 (2.434z 2 + 2.191z + 0.164)
Gmod (z) = 4
(9)
z − 3.152z 3 + 3.692z 2 − 1.906z + 0.366
It is important that, the dynamic characteristics of the
nominal model is not signiﬁcantly changed for the eﬀectiveness of the DOB, even if the nominal plant model is
changed as from (8) to (9). Figure 7 shows the Bode plots
of the nominal plant model and the modiﬁed nominal plant
model. While unstable zero is removed in the modiﬁed
plant model, the frequency characteristics of the system
are not changed, as shown in the ﬁgure. Therefore, the
modiﬁed nominal plant model is suitable for the implementation of the DOB.

In the design of Q-ﬁlter, the following conditions should
be fulﬁlled to guarantee robust stability:
(1) Q-ﬁlter must be stable, and
(2) the magnitude of Q(jw) should be less than that of
W −1 (jw) for all w ∈ R+ .
Based on the experimentally obtained W (s) in (6), a Qﬁlter can be designed such that its magnitude is smaller
than that of W −1 (jw) at the entire frequency range. A
possible Q(s) is
0.218
(7)
Q(z) = 2
z − 1.067s + 0.285

4. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
4.1 Reference Tracking Performance Evaluation
Figure 8 shows the experimental results of the PD controller without the DOB; the reference trajectory and the
controlled joint angle are shown in the ﬁgure. The locomotion speed was increased gradually in the experiment.
Recall that, since the reference trajectory has drastically
changing moments, the derivative controller was designed
such that it calculates the control input by using only

7249

19th IFAC World Congress
Cape Town, South Africa. August 24-29, 2014

Bode Diagram

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

Magnitude (dB)

0
nominal plant model
−50

modified model

−100
−150

Phase (deg)

−200
0
−180
−360
−540
−2
10

−1

0

10

1

2

10
10
Frequency (rad/s)

3

10

10

Reference

1.1

Fig. 10. Snapshots of a video of a gait control experiment.

Estimated disturbance by the DOB

Fig. 7. Bode plot of the nominal plant model and modiﬁed
model.
Tracking angle

Output [rad]

1
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6

10000
8000
6000
4000
2000
0
−2000

0.5
0
0.4

0

2

4

6

8
Tims [sec]

10

12

14

2

4

6

8
Tims [sec]

10

12

14

16

16

Fig. 11. Estimated disturbance by the DOB.
Fig. 8. Tracking performance with the PD control only.
Reference

1.1

DOB, the response time was shortened and the closed-loop
bandwidth was enlarged signiﬁcantly. The eﬀectiveness of
the DOB was more noteworthy as the locomotion speed
increased, which validates that the PD controller with the
DOB achieves the desired tracking performance at the
entire speed range.

Tracking angle

Output [rad]

1
0.9
0.8
0.7

4.2 Ground Contact Detection

0.6
0.5
0.4

0

2

4

6

8
Tims [sec]

10

12

14

16

Fig. 9. Tracking performance with the proposed control
method.
the output of the plant not including the reference signal.
Nevertheless, the tracking performance of the PD controller was insuﬃcient to realize successful locomotion. It
was diﬃcult to obtain the desired performance only with
the PD control, because the gear-box and the timing belt
increased the response time during force transmission. The
backlash of the gear-box and the timing belt signiﬁcantly
aﬀected the tracking performance. Moreover, the tracking performance was more deteriorated as the locomotion
speed of the Cheetaroid-I increased. This is because the
reduced stance period made the change of the reference
trajectory more drastic.
The tracking performance with the proposed control
method is shown in Fig. 9, where the performance was
remarkably improved than the PD controller by the proposed control method. In both experiments in Figs. 8
and 9, the same gains were used in the PD controller.
Since disturbances and model uncertainties by the gearbox and the timing belt were signiﬁcantly rejected by the

Snapshots of a video of a gait experiment are shown in Fig.
10; the right hand side of the Cheetaroid-I was the front
direction. The whole motion is divided into two periods
based on the motion of right hind leg: (a)-(c) represent
the swing period, and (d)-(f) are the stance period. In
the stance period, since the feet contact the ground,
the ground reaction forces occur and can be measured
by appropriate sensing mechanism. Measurement of the
ground reaction force is important in the locomotion
control because the gait stability is closely related to the
ground reaction force.
In this paper, the ground contact detection is conducted
through the estimated disturbance by the DOB. The artiﬁcial experimental environment was set for the veriﬁcation
of ground contact detection by the DOB. The sinusoidal
reference trajectory was used, and the feet contacted the
ground slightly for checking the accuracy of the proposed
method. Figure 11 shows the estimated disturbance by the
DOB, where the estimated disturbance is periodic, and the
peaks occur in the estimated disturbance at the ground
contact moments. Therefore, the estimated disturbance
can be used as the estimate of the ground reaction force
with a proposed ﬁltering law, i.e.,
[
]
ˆ − d0 , 0)
dˆGN D (t) = f L(s) max(d(t)
(10)

7250

19th IFAC World Congress
Cape Town, South Africa. August 24-29, 2014

5
Ground contact force [N]

the disturbance estimated by the DOB. Consequently, the
proposed control system enabled both eﬀective control of
a Cheetaroid-I leg system and removal of force sensors for
detecting the ground contact. The DOB design was only
limited to the distal joint in this paper. The extension of
the DOB to the proximal joints is the future work.

Measured by force sensor
Estimated ground reaction force

4
3
2

REFERENCES
1
0

0

2

4

6

8
Tims [sec]

10

12

14

16

Fig. 12. Ground contact detection.
In (10) dˆGN D is the estimated ground reaction force, f is
a scaling factor, L(s) is a lowpass ﬁlter, dˆ is the estimated
disturbance by the DOB, and d0 is a threshold value. The
estimated disturbance is regarded as the ground contact
when it is larger than the threshold value.
Figure 12 shows the ground contact detection results during the sinusoidal tracking experiment, where the estimated ground reaction force and the measured ground
reaction force are shown together. The tendency of the
estimated ground reaction force was similar to the ground
reaction force measured by a force sensor. The error between estimated ground reaction force and force sensor
measurement was 0.592N in the root-mean-square (RMS).
The error was mainly caused by the lowpass ﬁltering, since
the high frequency component of ground reaction force
was ﬁltered twice by Q-ﬁlter and L(s). The estimated
ground reaction force preceded the measurement of the
force sensor occasionally, and the estimated ground reaction force held longer than the ground reaction force
measured by the force sensor as shown in Fig. 12. This
is because a force sensing resistor (FSR) sensor was used
to measure ground reaction force in the experiment, and
the FSR can measure the ground reaction force applied to
the sensing area of FSR only (in this case, the diameter
of the used FSR was 25mm). Therefore, the FSR sensor
could not measure the ground reaction force even when the
feet contacted the ground. On the other hand, the sensing
area where the DOB can estimate was not constrained,
since the DOB could estimate the total external force that
acts on the entire area of the foot. Therefore, wider and
faster ground contact detection could be achieved when
the ground reaction force is estimated by the proposed
DOB-based algorithm.
5. CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, the dynamic model of a Cheetaroid-I leg
system was analyzed, and the nominal plant model and
the range of model variations were obtained through extensive experiments. The parameters of the nominal plant
model were further optimized considering the closed-loop
stability of the DOB, as well as the closed-loop performance. Also, the ground contact detection was conducted
through the magnitude of the estimated disturbance by
the DOB. The proposed control system was veriﬁed by
the experimental results. The tracking performance was
remarkably improved by the DOB, and the ground contact
detection was available by monitoring the magnitude of

K. Kong and M. Tomizuka, Design of a Rehabilitation
Device Based on a Mechanical Link System. ASME
Journal of Mechanisms and Robotics, Vol. 4, 035001-1,
2012.
J. Savall, A. Avello, and L. Briones, Two compact robots
for remote inspection of hazardous areas in nuclear
power plants. Proc. the IEEE International Conference
on Robotics and Automation, pages 1993-1998, 1999.
K. Nagatani, S. Kiribayashi, Y. Okada, S. Tadokoro, T.
Nishimura, T. Yoshida, E. Koyanagi, and Y. Hada,
Redesign of rescue mobile robot Quince. In IEEE
International Symposium, Safety, Security, and Rescue
Robotics (SSRR),, pages 13-18, 2011.
K. Kaneko,
Towards emergency response humanoid
robots, Mechatronics (MECATRONICS) , 2012 9th
France-Japan & 7th Europe-Asia Congress on and Research and Education in Mechatronics (REM), 2012
13th Int’l Workshop, pages 504-511, 2012.
B. Na, H. Choi, and K. Kong, Design of a DirectDriven Linear Actuator for Development of a Cheetaroid
Robot. Proc. the IEEE International Conference on
Robotics and Automation, Germany, pages 4008-4013,
2013.
M. Raibert, K. Blankespoor, G. Nelson, R. Playter,
and the BigDog Team, BigDog, the Rough-Terrain
Quadruped Robot. Proc. 17th Int Conf. Federation of
Automatic Control, pages 10822-10825, July 2008.
M. A. Lewis, M. R. Bunting, B. Salemi, and H, Hoﬀmann,
Toward Ultra High Speed Locomotors: Design and Test
of a Cheetah Robot Hind Limb. Proc. the IEEE
International Conference on Robotics and Automation,
Shanghai, China, pages 1990-1996, 2011.
K. Ohnishi, A new servo method in mechatronics. Trans.
of Japanese Society of Electrical Engineering, vol. 107D, pages 83-86, 1987.
K. Fujiyama, M. Tomizuka, and R. Katayama, Digital
tracking controller design for CD player using disturbance observer. Proc. of the Int. Workshop on Advanced
Motion Control, pages 598-603, 1998.
K. Kong, J. Bae, and M. Tomizuka, Control of rotary
series elastic actuator for ideal force-mode actuation
in human-robot interaction applications. IEEE/ASME
Trans. on Mechatronics, vol. 14, no. 1, pages 1-14, 2009.
T. Umeno and Y. Hori, Robust speed control of DC servomotors using modern two degrees-oﬀreedom controller
design, IEEE Trans. on Industrial Electronics, vol. 38,
no. 5, pages 363-368, 1991.
S. Oh, and Y. Hori, Disturbance Attenuation Control for
Power-Assist Wheelchair Operation on Slopes, Control
Systems Technology, IEEE Transactions on, vol.PP,
no.99, pp.1-1, 2013

7251

