Control of Legged Robots using Model Predictive Optimized Path
Integral

arXiv:2508.11917v1 [cs.RO] 16 Aug 2025

Hossein Keshavarz1 , Alejandro Ramirez-Serrano1 , Majid Khadiv2
Abstract— Legged robots possess a unique ability to traverse
rough terrains and navigate cluttered environments, making
them well-suited for complex, real-world unstructured scenarios. However, such robots have not yet achieved the same level
as seen in natural systems. Recently, sampling-based predictive
controllers have demonstrated particularly promising results.
This paper investigates a sampling-based model predictive
strategy combining model predictive path integral (MPPI) with
cross-entropy (CE) and covariance matrix adaptation (CMA)
methods to generate real-time whole-body motions for legged
robots across multiple scenarios. The results show that combining the benefits of MPPI, CE and CMA, namely using model
predictive optimized path integral (MPOPI), demonstrates
greater sample efficiency, enabling robots to attain superior
locomotion results using fewer samples when compared to
typical MPPI algorithms. Extensive simulation experiments in
multiple scenarios on a quadruped robot show that MPOPI can
be used as an anytime control strategy, increasing locomotion
capabilities at each iteration.

I. INTRODUCTION
Current algorithms for legged locomotion and manipulation are generally divided into two main groups: gradientbased model-predictive control (MPC) [1] and gradientfree reinforcement learning (RL) [2]. MPC policies do not
require offline training as they leverage models for real-time
trajectory optimization. However, MPC is computationally
intensive at run-time, making it difficult to include wholebody dynamics and handle collision constraints in real-time.
To reduce online computation, simplified models are often
employed [3]–[5], which prevents them from leveraging fullbody dynamics to solve complicated locomotion or manipulation tasks. More recent works have enabled whole-body
MPC and have shown promise in realizing complex realworld behaviors [6]–[10]. Furthermore, several works have
reduced the online computation of whole-body MPC by
learning the solutions [11]–[14].
Alternatively, sim-to-real RL has shown impressive
progress in recent years [15]–[17], thanks to efficient parallel
simulation on modern hardware [18, 19] and improved simto-real transfer via domain randomization techniques [15, 17,
20]. However, exploration in RL for legged robots remains
a serious challenge, mainly due to the sparse rewards in
complex environments [21, 22]. Compared to MPC, one
downside of RL policy optimization is the significant effort
1 University of Calgary, Department of Mechanical Engineering,
2500 University Drive NW, Calgary, AB, Canada Emails:

hossein.keshavarz, aramirez@ucalgary.ca
2 Munich
Institute of Robotics and Machine Intelligence
(MIRMI), Technical University of Munich (TUM), Germany Email:

majid.khadiv@tum.de

required to find suitable reward functions and a suitable
set of locomotion parameters for each task. Furthermore, to
successfully transfer learned control policies to real robots,
an extensive sim-to-real randomization is required, and this
procedure is entirely ad hoc and task dependent.
Sampling-based MPC has recently emerged as an attractive middle-ground that does not require offline training and at the same time can leverage parallel simulation
and mitigate issues of gradient-based methods in handling
discontinuous and non-convex dynamics. Among different
approaches, model predictive path integral (MPPI) [23],
covariance matrix adaptation (CMA) [24], and cross-entropy
method (CEM) [25] have attracted a lot of attention, and
several variants of them have been proposed. Contrary to
the common belief that sampling-based approaches are computationally intractable for high-dimensional systems, recent
research has shown otherwise [26]–[29]. However, there is
still no consensus among researchers on which technique
is most suitable for complex legged locomotion control.
This paper aims to investigate this. In summary, this paper
provides the following contributions:
1) We present a comparative analysis of different
sampling-based MPCs, underscoring the practical advantages and effectiveness of a combined strategy,
namely model predictive optimized path integral
(MPOPI), for locomotion and loco-manipulation problems.
2) We apply MPOPI to the problem of quadrupedal
locomotion and loco-manipulation. To the best of our
knowledge, this is the first work that demonstrates
the application of such strategies in the context of
locomotion.
3) We carry out a wide range of simulation experiments
demonstrating the capabilities of MPOPI for solving
high-dimensional and complex tasks for generating
whole-body motions in real time.
This paper is structured as follows: Section II presents MPPI,
CMA and CE methods. Section III describes the locomotion
framework based on MPOPI, which is a combination of
MPPI, CE and CMA, and its key components. In Sections IV,
the effectiveness of the locomotion framework based on
MPOPI is demonstrated, highlighting its superiority over
MPPI through an extensive comparison across various scenarios. In Section V, the hyperparameters of MPOPI and
their effects on the performance are further analyzed. Finally,
Section VI summarizes and concludes the paper.

II. P RELIMINARIES
This section describes three widely adopted samplingbased MPC formulations from the literature: MPPI, CMA,
and CE.
A. Model predictive path integral (MPPI)
MPPI samples N possible control trajectories from a
multivariate Gaussian distribution ut ∼ N (µt , Σt ), where µt
is the mean and Σt is the covariance matrix at time t. The
cost of each sampled control trajectory is then evaluated
by simulating these trajectories in parallel. The optimal
control input to the system is then calculated through an
exponentially weighted average of the samples based on their
corresponding cost as follows [23]:


min
exp − Ln −L
λ

,
(1a)
ωn =
Ln −Lmin
N
∑n=1 exp − λ
N

µt = ∑ ωn ut ,

(1b)

n=1

where Ln represents the cost of the nth trajectory, ωn denotes
the corresponding trajectory weight, and λ is the temperature
parameter that determines the controller’s sensitivity to differences in trajectory cost. A lower value of λ increases the
influence of the best-performing trajectory, while a higher
value distributes the weight more uniformly across all tested
samples [23]. Such a process is repeated in a receding
horizon fashion, and the mean is updated at each time step
using a constant covariance matrix (i.e., Σt−1 = Σt ). The
MPPI algorithm is summarized in Algorithm 1.
Algorithm 1: MPPI Control Algorithm
Require: Initial state x0 , control parameters (µ0 , Σ0 ), number
of samples N, time horizon T , temperature parameter λ
Ensure: Optimal control input u
1: Initialize control trajectory mean µt and covariance Σt
2: Initialize sample trajectory cost Ln = 0
3: for each sample n = 1, . . . , N do
4:
for each timestep t = 0, . . . , T do
5:
Sample action sequence: ut ∼ N (µt , Σt )
6:
Simulate forward for T time steps using un
7:
Compute the resulting cost and add it to Ln
8:
end for
9: end for
10: Compute weights ωn for all samples using Equation (1a)
11: Update control trajectory mean µt using Equation (1b)
12: Select the control input for the system: u = µt [0]
13: Apply control input u
14: Shift control mean: µt ← shifted(µt )

B. Covariance matrix adaptation (CMA)
In MPPI, the covariance matrix (Σt ) is treated as a fixed
parameter throughout the iterations. CMA [24] employs a
multivariate Gaussian distribution as the search distribution

and updates its parameters (mean and covariance) to generate
superior solutions. Algorithm 2 shows CMA control algorithm that computes the optimal control input by iteratively
updating the control trajectory’s mean and covariance using
sampling and weighted feedback. Note that it is important to
update the covariance matrix first as the covariance update
must rely on the old µt (i.e. the one used to sample).
Variants of the algorithm can be formulated depending on
the weight computation strategy. The parameter α ∈ (0, 1]
acts as a learning rate that controls how much the new
samples influence the updated parameters. A smaller α
results in slower adaptation, relying more on the previous
mean and covariance, which can help maintain stability but
may slow convergence. Conversely, a larger α allows faster
adaptation to recent sample information, which can speed up
convergence but may introduce higher variance in the search
process. In this paper, inspiring from [24], the weights are
Algorithm 2: CMA Control Algorithm
Require: Initial state x0 , control parameters (µ0 , Σ0 ), number
of samples N, time horizon T , learning rate α
Ensure: Optimal control input u
1: Initialize control trajectory mean µt and covariance Σt
2: Initialize sample trajectory cost Ln = 0
3: for each sample n = 1, . . . , N do
4:
for each timestep t = 0, . . . , T do
5:
Sample action sequence: ut ∼ N (µt , Σt )
6:
Simulate forward for T time steps using un
7:
Compute the resulting cost and add it to Ln
8:
end for
9: end for
10: Compute weights w1, . . . , wN using Equation (2a)
N
⊤
11: Σt ← 1 − α ∑N
k=1 wk  Σ + α ∑k=1 wk (uk − µt )(uk − µt )
N
N
12: µt ← 1 − α ∑k=1 wk µt + α ∑k=1 wk uk
13: Select the control input for the system: u = µt [0]
14: Apply control input u
15: Shift control mean: µt ← shifted(µt )
computed using a logarithmic ranking scheme that assigns
higher importance to top-ranked samples while gradually
decreasing the weight for lower-ranked ones. Specifically,
for each trajectory i ∈ {1, . . . , N}, the normalized weights
are given by:


N +1
wi = log
, i ∈ {1, . . . , N},
(2a)
i
wi
= N
wnorm
,
(2b)
i
∑ j=1 w j + ε
where ε is a small constant (1e-10) for numerical stability.
This ranking-based weighting emphasizes better-performing
samples while maintaining a smooth decay in importance
across the ranked set.
C. Cross entropy (CE)
CE is a random sampling Monte Carlo method for importance sampling and optimization [30]. Unlike MPPI and

CMA, which consider all cost values when calculating sample weights, CE sorts the cost values and selects a fixed
number of elite sample candidates (Ke ). This elite set is
then used to determine the parameters of interest (i.e., mean
and covariance) of the population for the next iteration.
Consequently, unlike MPPI, where the covariance remains
constant, the CE updates both the mean and the covariance
at each time step as detailed in Algorithm 3. In contrast to
CMA, this method assigns a weight of K1e to the best Ke
samples and zero to the others. Additionally, the learning
rate is set to α = 1.
Algorithm 3: CE Control Algorithm
Require: Initial state x0 , control parameters (µ0 , Σ0 ), number
of samples N, time horizon T
Ensure: Optimal control input u
1: Initialize control trajectory mean µt and covariance Σt
2: Initialize sample trajectory cost Ln = 0
3: for each sample n = 1, . . . , N do
4:
for each timestep t = 0, . . . , T do
5:
Sample action sequence: ut ∼ N (µt , Σt )
6:
Simulate forward for T time steps using un
7:
Compute the resulting cost and add it to Ln
8:
end for
9: end for
10: Sort L1:N
Ke 1
11: µt ← ∑k=1
Ke uk
Ke 1
⊤
12: Σt ← ∑k=1
Ke (uk − µt )(uk − µt )
13: Select the control input for the system: u = µt [0]
14: Apply control input u
15: Shift control mean: µt ← shifted(µt )

III. P ROPOSED LOCOMOTION FRAMEWORK
In this section, the locomotion framework developed based
on MPOPI is presented. Firstly, the MPOPI controller is
described, followed by an explanation of how it is integrated
into the developed locomotion framework.

algorithm because the mean and covariance are not updated.

Algorithm 4: MPOPI Control Algorithm
Require: Initial state x0 , control parameters (µ0 , Σ0 ), number of samples N, time horizon T , temperature parameter
λ , updating cycle L, learning rate α
Ensure: Optimal control input u
1: Initialize control trajectory mean µt and covariance Σt
2: µt′ ← µt
3: Σt′ ← Σt
4: Initialize sample trajectory cost Ln = 0
5: for each l = 1, . . . , L do
6:
for each sample n = 1, . . . , N/L do
7:
Sample action sequence: ut ∼ N (0, Σt′ )
8:
for each timestep t = 0, 1, . . . do
9:
Simulate forward for T time steps using un
10:
Compute the resulting cost and add it to Ln
11:
Ln + = λ (1 − α)µt′ Σt−1 (ut + µt′ − µt )
12:
end for
13:
end for
14:
if l < L then
15:
// CMA + CE Methods
16:
Sort L1:N/L and select Ke samples
17:
Compute weights w1!, . . . , wKe using Equation (2a)
Σt′ ←
18:

Ke

1 − α ∑ wk Σt′
k=1
Ke

+ α ∑ wk (uk − µt )(uk − µt )⊤
 k=1

′
e
e
wk uk
wk µt′ + α ∑Kk=1
19:
µt ← 1 − α ∑Kk=1
20:
end if
21: end for
22: // MPPI Method
23: Compute weights ωn for all samples using Equation (1a)
24: Update control trajectory mean µt = ωn (ut + µt′ − µt )
25: Select the control input for the system: u = µt [0]
26: Apply control input u
27: Shift control mean: µt ← shifted(µt )

A. Model predictive optimized path integral (MPOPI)
MPOPI combines the MPPI with CE and CMA methods
to take advantage of each method with the goal of creating
a unified approach that reduces the time needed to find a
control action [31]. In contrast to MPPI, CMA and CE, in
MPOPI an initial set of randomized samples is generated
using a random or predefined mean and covariance values.
Subsequently, such two parameters are updated via CE and
CMA from where a new set of improved randomized samples
is generated using the updated mean and covariance as
detailed in Algorithm 4. The updating process is repeated for
L cycles, from which a new subset of improved robot motion
trajectories (joint positions) is generated. Such a strategy
enables an efficient search over actions to quickly find the
optimal sequence, with reduced computation. When L = 1,
the MPOPI algorithm provides similar results to the MPPI

B. Locomotion control using MPOPI
In this work, we use the locomotion framework developed
in [28] as a base framework. Our framework incorporates
additional elements for updating the mean and covariance of
the samples. A block diagram of the proposed system is illustrated in Fig. 1. The process starts with a user-specified goal,
which defines the target for the robot. Within the MPOPI
module, the framework samples a set of trajectory rollouts
in parallel using MuJoCo physics engine [32] on a multi-core
CPU, each parameterized by control sequences θ1 , θ2 , ..., θn .
These trajectories are evaluated using a cost function, and
the best-performing (elite) trajectories (θ1 , θ2 , ..., θke ) are
selected. The mean and the covariance of the distribution
are updated based on the elite set using the CE method.

MPOPI
CE + CMA

User specified Goal

𝜇𝑛𝑒𝑤 , Σ𝑛𝑒𝑤
𝜽𝟏
𝜽𝟐

𝐽1 = 𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑡(𝜃1 )
𝐽2 = 𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑡(𝜃2 )

..
.
𝜽𝒏
Sample
trajectory
rollouts

MPPI
𝜽𝟏
𝜽𝟐

..

𝜽𝟏,𝒏𝒆𝒘

Updating
Mean ()

𝜽𝟐,𝒏𝒆𝒘

.
.

Updating
Cov ()

Joint
targets

Updating
Mean ()

PD

𝜏

encoders

𝜽𝒌,𝒏𝒆𝒘

𝜽𝒌

𝐽𝑛 = 𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑡(𝜃𝑛 )
Cost
calculation

Elite
selection

500 Hz

Updating
mean/cov
100 Hz

Robot State

This process repeats L cycles and the joint targets input
to the system are then calculated through an exponentially
weighted average of the samples using MPPI. The resulting
joint targets are passed to a Proportional-Derivative (PD)
controller, which operates at 500 Hz to compute torque
commands and send them to the robot. Following [26], this
approach offers two key advantages: i) it reduces the size of
the search space, and ii) promotes the generation of smoother
control inputs.

1.5 m, 10 @ 0.15 m
m

Fig. 1: Block diagram of the MPOPI locomotion control method.

Robot’s COM
trajectories

IV. S IMULATION R ESULTS
In this section, we use the simulation of a Go1 quadruped
robot, controlled by MPOPI and compare its performance
against MPPI. For a fair comparison, while MPPI uses 30
samples, MPOPI uses 10 samples repeated over 3 cycles (L =
3), resulting in the same total number of samples. The other
optimization variables, such as the time horizon (T = 40)
and the temperature parameter (λ = 0.1), are kept the same
for both methods. To compare, the robot was commanded to
perform the following tasks:
• Climbing stairs,
• Climbing over boxes of different heights, and
• Pushing a box to a user-defined position.

1.8 m, 9 @ 0.2 m m
m

Fig. 2: Stair climbing (side view).

Fig. 3: Stair climbing (top view).
A. Stair Climbing
Stair climbing requires great joint exploration. To test the
abilities of MPOPI to deal with such climbing scenarios,
diverse tests were performed asking the robot to climb stairs
of different heights (e.g., 15 cm) and tread length (e.g., 20
cm) as illustrated in Fig. 2.
In this scenario, the robot was commanded to achieve
a set of m waypoints located along the stairs while asked
to achieve a given (user-defined) locomotion speed. The
obtained results (Fig. 3) show that MPOPI achieves the most
stable and accurate performance as defined by the metrics of
center of mass (CoM) trajectory smoothness and position
error. The robot achieves a smooth trajectory with minimal
lateral deviation, while MPPI shows some greater trajectory

fluctuations (Fig. 3). MPOPI maintains a smooth and consistent ascent while tracking elevation changes effectively.
Compared to MPPI, the MPOPI approach is able to
generate effective robot motion strategies in less time. As an
example, Fig. 4 compares the time required for a quadruped
robot to find a suitable whole-body locomotion using MPOPI
(in red) and MPPI (in green). MPOPI demonstrates a significantly faster ascent, where the robot takes about half the
time (30 s) to complete the same task when compared to the
time taken when using MPPI (i.e., 53 s).
The obtained cost density for this specific example (Fig.
5) indicates a superior performance of MPOPI. Its sharp and

GOAL

START

MPOPI
MPPI

t=0s
t=0s

t=8s
t = 10 s

t = 15 s
t = 21 s

t = 18 s
t = 32 s

t = 22 s
t = 40 s

t = 30 s
t = 53 s

Fig. 4: Stair climbing using MPOPI and MPPI sampling-based MPCs.

Fig. 5: The cost distribution of MPOPI and MPPI in the stair
climbing scenario. In this setting, we can observe that MPPI
has flattened distributions, while MPOPI’s cost distribution
has a sharp peak.

(a) Climbing a box when its height is 40 cm.

narrow peak near the lower end of the cost axis indicates
both low average cost and low variability across trials. MPPI
shows higher and more inconsistent costs, with a widely
spread and relatively flat distribution.
B. Climbing large boxes
Similar to stair climbing, MPOPI was analyzed on enabling robots to climb over large boxes (i.e., obstacles having
larger risers and treads when compared to those found in
stairs). Two different box heights were tested in simulations:
40 cm and 45 cm. As the box height increases, the climbing
task becomes more difficult, requiring the robot to perform
greater exploration in the joint space.
Figure 6a shows that when the robot (having a nominal
body height of 27 cm when walking) climbs obstacles with
a height of 40 cm, the task is done successfully using both
methods. Both MPPI and MPOPI have a low cost, while
MPOPI shows a high density near the lower cost range
with more spread, reflecting greater variability in cost. When
increasing the obstacle’s height (e.g., 45 cm), MPOPI shows
a prominent, sharp peak near the lower cost range, indicating
its ability to perform efficiently and consistently, even with
increased task difficulty as shown in Fig. 6b. Meanwhile,
MPPI exhibits a broader and flatter distribution, with more
mass spread across higher cost values, suggesting reduced efficiency and increased variability in performance. Ultimately,
MPPI was unable to complete the task successfully.

(b) Climbing a box when its height is 45 cm.

Fig. 6: The cost distribution of MPOPI and MPPI in the third
scenario: climbing a box. MPPI’s distribution flattens with
the taller box. In contrast, MPOPI maintains a sharp peak in
both situations.

C. Pushing a box
In this scenario, the controllers are evaluated based on
their whole-body contact planning capabilities for pushing
a box from a predefined initial position to a final position
(i.e., locomanipulation tasks). Note that the tests focus on
the position of the box along the trajectory (and not on its
orientation). During the tests, the box size was constrained
to a size of 0.36m × 0.36m × 0.36m with a mass of 3.5
kg. The box is initially positioned at 1m in front of the
quadruped, and the task is to bring the position of the box
within 0.2 m of the goal waypoints at any time. The robot

MPPI

Box’s goal
position

Box’s goal
position
Robot

Box

b) Final box position when
pushing using MPPI.

Robot’s initial
position

MPOPI

a) Initial box position before
pushing.

Box’s goal
position

c) Final box position when
pushing using MPOPI.

Robot’s initial
position

Fig. 7: Comparison of MPPI and MPOPI methods for
pushing a box.
Fig. 9: Trajectories of the robot and the box toward a far
target position in the XY-plane.
Robot’s initial
position
Box’s goal
position

Robot’s initial
position
Box’s goal
position

Fig. 8: Trajectories of the robot and the box in the XY-plane.

is requested to push the targeted box with its frontal face
following a sequence of two 2D waypoint positions, i.e., the
robot is allowed to push the box at any point on the box’s
faces. When the initial position of the robot and the two
desired waypoints of the box define a linear trajectory (i.e.,
pushing the box forward), both MPPI and MPOPI controllers
achieve a smooth linear trajectory and achieve the goal. Both
controllers show small trajectory errors.
However, pushing the box along a 3-point trajectory that
does not define a rectilinear path presents more challenges,
resulting in different performance between the MPPI and
the MPOPI controllers as shown in Fig. 7. Also, Fig. 8
demonstrates that MPOPI enables smoother and more direct
trajectories for both the robot and the box, resulting in the
box reaching its goal with greater accuracy. In contrast,
MPPI exhibits a slightly irregular trajectory, particularly in

the final stage, where the box deviates from reaching the
final goal destination. Additionally, the robot’s path under
MPPI shows greater lateral oscillation, suggesting less efficient coordination between the robot’s motion and the box’s
trajectory. These results indicate that updating the mean and
the covariance of samples enables better adaptation of the
sampling distribution, leading to improved motion control
performance in complex, directionally coupled tasks.
In another test, the goal for the box was set at (2, 2),
which is farther away compared to the previous test. Figure
9 illustrates the X–Y trajectories of the robot and the box
for both controllers. In the MPOPI case (top), the robot
successfully pushed the box to the target location, closely
following a direct path with minimal deviation. In contrast,
MPPI (bottom) was unable to reach the target, with both the
robot and the box deviating significantly from the desired
trajectory. This demonstrates MPOPI’s superior ability to
maintain task accuracy over longer distances compared to
MPPI.
V. MPOPI KEY PARAMETERS
Based on the simulation results, the MPOPI controller
delivers superior performance in locomotion and locomanipulation tasks. Overall, the method performs the best in
complex environments where robots require greater exploration in the joint space to identify a viable path. However,
two key parameters in the MPOPI controller (Algorithm
4) have been observed to significantly influence its performance: i) the number of cycles performed to update the mean
and the covariance (denoted as L), and ii) the covariance
matrix updating process during optimization.
A. Number of loops (L)
To determine the best set of parameters, diverse methodologies can be used, including running diverse tests from

Fig. 10: Policy rollout costs for walking while changing L.
Fig. 12: Policy rollout costs for stair climbing while changing
L.

0.45 m

Fig. 11: Policy rollout costs for stair climbing while changing
L.

which the mean and standard deviations of each test can be
computed. Figs 10 and 11 show examples for two illustrative
scenarios for a total of 30 samples (N = 30): walking and
stair climbing. Fig. 10 shows that increasing L does not affect
the cost distribution, indicating that adjusting L for walking
offers no benefit. However, for more complex tasks (typically
requiring more exploration) such as stair climbing, having an
L larger than one (L > 1) is preferred (Fig. 11).
Figure 12 illustrates the effect of the number of loops
L across different sample sizes (N = 30, 40, 50). These
observations indicate that in different number of samples,
larger than one cycle is preferred.
B. Covariance matrix
While MPPI uses a fixed initial covariance matrix Σ =
λini I12 , where λini represents the standard deviation for each
joint, MPOPI updates the covariance matrix Σ at each time
step. This involves computing the eigenvalues and eigenvectors of Σ, applying a lower bound to the eigenvalues
to ensure numerical stability, and reconstructing the updated
covariance matrix using the bounded eigenvalues and their
corresponding eigenvectors. To analyze the effect of updating Σ, an exploration magnitude is defined as the largest
eigenvalue λ of the covariance matrix.
Figure 13 shows how the exploration magnitude and the
cost value change when the robot climbs a tall box. This

Fig. 13: Exploration magnitude and cost distribution for
climbing a big box.
C

task is very hard to achieve when MPPI is used, and the
robot fails. However, MPOPI enables the robot to complete
the task. As shown in Fig. 13, the task can be divided
into three steps. In the first step, the robot walks from the
A where the exploration magnitude is
initial position to ⃝
A - ⃝),
B
at a minimum. For the second step (⃝
the robot
starts climbing the box, stimulating an increased value of
the exploration magnitude. Here, as the cost value decreases,
the exploration magnitude remains large, enabling the robot
C the exploration
to adapt to the challenging task. At ⃝,
magnitude stabilizes and decreases, suggesting the robot has
found an effective policy and no longer requires significant
variability in action sampling. This coordinated behavior
across plots demonstrates the effectiveness of adaptive exploration in the MPOPI framework for complex motion planning
tasks.
VI. C ONCLUSIONS
In this paper, we developed a locomotion controller based
on MPOPI and applied it to several quadrupedal locomotion
and loco-manipulation tasks. We conducted an extensive set
of simulation experiments to compare the performance of
MPOPI to other widely used sampling-based MPC techniques, i.e., MPPI. Our results show that MPOPI provides

better performance across a number of performance indices,
including tracking error, and provides lower costs when
compared to the traditional MPPI for generating real-time
whole-body motion plans. We showed that while MPOPI
shows similar performance to MPPI when the number of
loop iterations L of MPOPI is one, it outperforms MPPI
when L > 1, resulting in a more versatile formulation for
whole-body MPC for legged robots that can be applied to
robots operating in complex unstructured environments or
performing complex tasks where MPPI tends to fail. In the
future, we plan to apply our developed locomotion control
framework based on MPOPI on real hardware.
R EFERENCES
[1] P. M. Wensing, M. Posa, Y. Hu, A. Escande, N. Mansard, and
A. Del Prete, “Optimization-based control for dynamic legged robots,”
IEEE Transactions on Robotics, vol. 40, pp. 43–63, 2023.
[2] S. Ha, J. Lee, M. van de Panne, Z. Xie, W. Yu, and M. Khadiv,
“Learning-based legged locomotion: State of the art and future
perspectives,” The International Journal of Robotics Research, p.
02783649241312698, 2024.
[3] M. Khadiv, A. Herzog, S. A. Moosavian, and L. Righetti, “Walking
control based on step timing adaptation,” IEEE Transactions on
Robotics, vol. 36, no. 3, pp. 629–643, 2020.
[4] E. Daneshmand, M. Khadiv, F. Grimminger, and L. Righetti, “Variable
horizon mpc with swing foot dynamics for bipedal walking control,”
IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 2349–2356,
2021.
[5] I. Taouil, L. Amatucci, M. Khadiv, A. Dai, V. Barasuol, G. Turrisi,
and C. Semini, “Non-gaited legged locomotion with monte-carlo
tree search and supervised learning,” IEEE Robotics and Automation
Letters, 2024.
[6] R. Grandia, F. Jenelten, S. Yang, F. Farshidian, and M. Hutter,
“Perceptive locomotion through nonlinear model predictive control,”
IEEE Transactions on Robotics, 2023.
[7] C. Mastalli, W. Merkt, G. Xin, J. Shim, M. Mistry, I. Havoutis,
and S. Vijayakumar, “Agile maneuvers in legged robots: a predictive
control approach,” IEEE Transactions on Robotics, 2023.
[8] A. Meduri, P. Shah, J. Viereck, M. Khadiv, I. Havoutis, and L. Righetti,
“Biconmp: A nonlinear model predictive control framework for whole
body motion planning,” IEEE Transactions on Robotics, 2023.
[9] H. Li and P. M. Wensing, “Cafe-mpc: A cascaded-fidelity model
predictive control framework with tuning-free whole-body control,”
IEEE Transactions on Robotics, 2024.
[10] G. Kim, D. Kang, J.-H. Kim, S. Hong, and H.-W. Park, “Contactimplicit model predictive control: Controlling diverse quadruped motions without pre-planned contact modes or trajectories,” The International Journal of Robotics Research, vol. 44, no. 3, pp. 486–510,
2025.
[11] J. Carius, F. Farshidian, and M. Hutter, “Mpc-net: A first principles
guided policy search,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, vol. 5,
no. 2, pp. 2897–2904, 2020.
[12] J. Viereck, A. Meduri, and L. Righetti, “Valuenetqp: Learned one-step
optimal control for legged locomotion,” in Learning for Dynamics and
Control Conference. PMLR, 2022, pp. 931–942.
[13] M. Khadiv, A. Meduri, H. Zhu, L. Righetti, and B. Schölkopf,
“Learning locomotion skills from mpc in sensor space,” in Learning
for Dynamics and Control Conference. PMLR, 2023.
[14] X. Pua and M. Khadiv, “Safe learning of locomotion skills from
mpc,” in 2024 IEEE-RAS 23rd International Conference on Humanoid
Robots (Humanoids). IEEE, 2024, pp. 459–466.
[15] M. Bogdanovic, M. Khadiv, and L. Righetti, “Model-free reinforcement learning for robust locomotion using demonstrations from trajectory optimization,” Frontiers in Robotics and AI, vol. 9, 2022.
[16] T. Miki, J. Lee, J. Hwangbo, L. Wellhausen, V. Koltun, and M. Hutter,
“Learning robust perceptive locomotion for quadrupedal robots in the
wild,” Science Robotics, vol. 7, no. 62, p. eabk2822, 2022.
[17] X. Cheng, K. Shi, A. Agarwal, and D. Pathak, “Extreme parkour with
legged robots,” in 2024 IEEE International Conference on Robotics
and Automation (ICRA). IEEE, 2024, pp. 11 443–11 450.

[18] N. Rudin, D. Hoeller, P. Reist, and M. Hutter, “Learning to walk
in minutes using massively parallel deep reinforcement learning,” in
Conference on Robot Learning. PMLR, 2022, pp. 91–100.
[19] V. Makoviychuk, L. Wawrzyniak, Y. Guo, M. Lu, K. Storey, M. Macklin, D. Hoeller, N. Rudin, A. Allshire, A. Handa, et al., “Isaac gym:
High performance gpu-based physics simulation for robot learning,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.10470, 2021.
[20] J. Hwangbo, J. Lee, A. Dosovitskiy, D. Bellicoso, V. Tsounis,
V. Koltun, and M. Hutter, “Learning agile and dynamic motor skills
for legged robots,” Science Robotics, vol. 4, no. 26, p. eaau5872, 2019.
[21] C. Zhang, N. Rudin, D. Hoeller, and M. Hutter, “Learning agile locomotion on risky terrains,” in 2024 IEEE/RSJ International Conference
on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS). IEEE, 2024, pp. 11 864–
11 871.
[22] V. Dhédin, A. K. C. Ravi, A. Jordana, H. Zhu, A. Meduri, L. Righetti,
B. Schölkopf, and M. Khadiv, “Diffusion-based learning of contact
plans for agile locomotion,” in 2024 IEEE-RAS 23rd International
Conference on Humanoid Robots (Humanoids). IEEE, 2024, pp.
637–644.
[23] G. Williams, A. Aldrich, and E. A. Theodorou, “Model predictive
path integral control: From theory to parallel computation,” Journal
of Guidance, Control, and Dynamics, vol. 40, no. 2, pp. 344–357,
2017.
[24] N. Hansen, “The cma evolution strategy: A tutorial,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1604.00772, 2016.
[25] P.-T. De Boer, D. P. Kroese, S. Mannor, and R. Y. Rubinstein, “A
tutorial on the cross-entropy method,” Annals of operations research,
vol. 134, no. 1, pp. 19–67, 2005.
[26] T. Howell, N. Gileadi, S. Tunyasuvunakool, K. Zakka, T. Erez, and
Y. Tassa, “Predictive sampling: Real-time behaviour synthesis with
mujoco,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.00541, 2022.
[27] H. Xue, C. Pan, Z. Yi, G. Qu, and G. Shi, “Full-order sampling-based
mpc for torque-level locomotion control via diffusion-style annealing,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.15610, 2024.
[28] J. Alvarez-Padilla, J. Z. Zhang, S. Kwok, J. M. Dolan, and Z. Manchester, “Real-time whole-body control of legged robots with modelpredictive path integral control,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.10469,
2024, available at: https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.10469.
[29] V. Kurtz and J. W. Burdick, “Generative predictive control: Flow
matching policies for dynamic and difficult-to-demonstrate tasks,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.13406, 2025.
[30] C. Pinneri, S. Sawant, S. Blaes, J. Achterhold, J. Stueckler, M. Rolinek,
and G. Martius, “Sample-efficient cross-entropy method for real-time
planning,” in Conference on Robot Learning. PMLR, 2021, pp. 1049–
1065.
[31] D. M. Asmar, R. Senanayake, S. Manuel, and M. J. Kochenderfer,
“Model predictive optimized path integral strategies,” in 2023 IEEE
International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA). IEEE,
2023, pp. 3182–3188.
[32] E. Todorov, T. Erez, and Y. Tassa, “Mujoco: A physics engine for
model-based control,” in 2012 IEEE/RSJ international conference on
intelligent robots and systems. IEEE, 2012, pp. 5026–5033.

