arXiv:2601.01409v1 [eess.SY] 4 Jan 2026

Sampling Strategy Design for Model Predictive
Path Integral Control on Legged Robot Locomotion
1st Chuyuan Tao

2nd Fanxin Wang*

3rd Haolong Jiang

School of Artificial Intelligence
Shandong University
Jinan, China
202599000126@sdu.edu.cn

Department of Mechatronics and Robotics
Xi’an Jiaotong-Liverpool University
Suzhou, China
Fanxin.Wang@xjtlu.edu.cn
*Corresponding author

Department of Mechatronics and Robotics
Xi’an Jiaotong-Liverpool University
Suzhou, China
University of Liverpool
United Kingdom
Haolong.Jiang22@student.xjtlu.edu.cn

4th Jia He

5th Yiyang Chen

6nd Qinglei Bu

Department of Mechatronics and Robotics Mechatronics and Robotic Systems Department of Mechatronics and Robotics
Xi’an Jiaotong-Liverpool University
Xi’an Jiaotong-Liverpool University
Xi’an Jiaotong-Liverpool University
Suzhou, China
Suzhou, China
Suzhou, China
Qinglei.Bu02@xjtlu.edu.cn
Yiyang.Chen2302@student.xjtlu.edu.cn
University of Liverpool
United Kingdom
Jia.He20@student.xjtlu.edu.cn

Abstract—Model Predictive Path Integral (MPPI) control has
emerged as a powerful sampling-based optimal control method
for complex, nonlinear, and high-dimensional systems. However,
directly applying MPPI to legged robotic systems presents several
challenges. This paper systematically investigates the role of
sampling strategy design within the MPPI framework for legged
robot locomotion. Based upon the idea of structured control
parameterization, we explore and compare multiple sampling
strategies within the framework, including both unstructured
and spline-based approaches. Through extensive simulations on a
quadruped robot platform, we evaluate how different sampling
strategies affect control smoothness, task performance, robustness, and sample efficiency. The results provide new insights into
the practical implications of sampling design for deploying MPPI
on complex legged systems.
Index Terms—Model predictive path integral control,
Sampling-based optimal control, Legged robot locomotion, Structured control parameterization, Quadruped robot simulation

I. I NTRODUCTION
MPPI control has recently become a highly effective
sampling-based optimal control framework for handling complex, nonlinear, and high-dimensional systems [1]–[3]. By
leveraging Monte Carlo rollouts and importance sampling,
MPPI avoids explicit gradient computation and naturally accommodates nonlinear dynamics, nonconvex cost functions,
and hard-to-model interactions. A key advantage of MPPI is its
inherent compatibility with parallel computing architectures,
such as GPUs, which enable thousands of trajectory rollouts
to be evaluated simultaneously [4], [5]. This property makes
MPPI particularly attractive for systems with complex dynamics and hybrid behaviors, including legged robots, where

analytical solutions and convex formulations are often impractical [6], [7].
Despite these advantages, directly applying MPPI to legged
robotic systems presents several challenges. One major limitation lies in the control sampling process itself. Standard MPPI
implementations typically sample control inputs independently
at each time step, which can lead to temporally uncorrelated
and non-smooth control sequences [8]. For legged robots operating in contact-rich environments, such non-smooth control
signals may result in unstable behaviors, excessive actuator
effort, or poor contact consistency. These issues are further
exacerbated by the hybrid nature of legged locomotion dynamics, where discontinuities due to contact switching and
impact events pose significant challenges for control and
optimization [9], [10].
To address these difficulties, prior work has explored structured control parameterizations within sampling-based and
MPC frameworks. Trajectory representations based on splines,
basis functions, or reduced-order parameterizations have been
shown to improve smoothness and sample efficiency in optimal
control [11], [12]. Notably, the work “Real-Time WholeBody Control of Legged Robots with Model-Predictive Path
Integral Control” [13] demonstrated a successful real-time
MPPI implementation on legged robots by sampling control
trajectories in a lower-dimensional space using cubic spline
parameterization. Instead of directly sampling discrete control
actions at each time step, the authors parameterized control
sequences with spline coefficients, thereby enforcing temporal
smoothness and reducing the effective dimensionality of the

sampling space. This approach significantly improved control
smoothness and enabled stable whole-body behaviors in realworld experiments.
Inspired by this line of work, this paper systematically
investigates the role of sampling strategy design in MPPI for
legged robot control. Building upon the idea of structured
control parameterization, we explore and compare multiple
sampling strategies within the MPPI framework, including
both unstructured and spline-based approaches. Through extensive simulations on a legged robot platform, we evaluate
how different sampling strategies affect control smoothness,
task performance, robustness, and sample efficiency. The
results provide new insights into the practical implications
of sampling design for MPPI-based legged locomotion and
highlight sampling strategy as a critical factor in deploying
MPPI on complex robotic systems.
A. Related Work
Sampling-based optimal control methods have been widely
studied for robotic systems operating under nonlinear dynamics, uncertainty, and safety constraints [3], [14]. Among
these approaches, path-integral-based control methods, such
as Model Predictive Path Integral (MPPI), have attracted
significant attention due to their ability to handle nonconvex
optimal control problems through stochastic sampling and
parallel computation [1], [15]. Recent research has focused
on improving the safety and robustness of path-integral control
by incorporating control-theoretic structures into the sampling
process. Tao et al. [16] proposed a framework that integrates
stochastic control barrier functions (CBFs) into path-integral
control, enabling probabilistic safety guarantees while preserving computational efficiency. Similarly, Wang et al. [17] introduced DBaS-Log-MPPI, which augments MPPI with barrier
states to shape the sampling distribution and improve safety
and efficiency in constrained environments.
In parallel, informed sampling has also been shown to be
essential in motion planning and learning-based control for
complex environments. Tao et al. [18] developed a guided
sampling-based motion planning algorithm for dynamic and
obstacle-cluttered environments, highlighting how structure
in the sampling process can significantly improve planning
efficiency and robustness. Related ideas have emerged in reinforcement learning, where safety and robustness are enforced
through adaptive control and barrier-based mechanisms [19],
[20]. Although learning-based approaches typically rely on
offline training, they share a common insight with samplingbased optimal control: imposing structure on the action or control space is crucial for reliable performance. For legged robots
in particular, prior work has shown that directly sampling
time-discretized control inputs often leads to nonsmooth and
unstable behaviors, motivating the use of structured parameterizations such as splines or reduced-order representations
in MPC and MPPI implementations [7], [13]. In contrast
to introducing a single structured representation, this work
systematically compares multiple sampling strategies within

the MPPI framework to better understand their impact on
performance and robustness in legged locomotion tasks.
II. P RELIMINARIES
A. Experimental Platform and Tasks
All experiments in this work are conducted on a Unitree
quadruped robot equipped with torque-controlled joints and
onboard state estimation. The robot provides full-state feedback including base pose, velocity, and joint states, enabling
real-time whole-body control under dynamic locomotion tasks.
We evaluate sampling strategies within the Model Predictive
Path Integral (MPPI) framework on a set of representative
locomotion scenarios that stress different aspects of control
smoothness, adaptability, and robustness:
• Flat-ground walking: steady-state locomotion on level
terrain, used to evaluate nominal tracking performance
and control smoothness.
• Stair climbing: traversal of a staircase with discrete
height changes, requiring precise foot placement and
coordinated whole-body motion.
• Large obstacle (box) traversal: stepping over a large
box obstacle, which induces abrupt changes in contact
configuration and demands expressive control trajectories.
These tasks are commonly used benchmarks for legged locomotion and jointly capture steady, moderately dynamic, and
highly non-smooth interaction regimes. All sampling strategies
are evaluated under identical task settings, cost functions, and
control constraints to enable a fair comparison.
B. Model Predictive Path Integral Control
Model Predictive Path Integral (MPPI) control is a
sampling-based stochastic optimal control method that computes control updates by evaluating the expected cost of
sampled trajectories. MPPI operates in a receding-horizon
fashion and is particularly well-suited for high-dimensional,
nonlinear systems such as legged robots.
Let xt ∈ Rn denote the system state and ut ∈ Rm the
control input. Given a horizon length H and a nominal control
sequence ū0:H−1 , MPPI generates N stochastic rollouts by
injecting noise into the control sequence:
(k)

ut

(k)

= ūt + ϵt ,

(k)

ϵt

∼ N (0, Σ),

(1)

where k = 1, . . . , N indexes the rollouts.
Each rollout is simulated forward using the system dynam(k)
ics to obtain a state trajectory {xt }H
t=0 . The cumulative cost
is evaluated as
H−1
X
(k)
(k)
(k)
S (k) =
ℓ(xt , ut ) + ϕ(xH ),
(2)
t=0

where ℓ(·) and ϕ(·) denote the running and terminal cost,
respectively.
The nominal control sequence is updated using a costweighted average of the noise realizations:
ūt ← ūt +

N
X
k=1

(k)

w(k) ϵt ,

exp(−S (k) /λ)
, (3)
w(k) = PN
(j) /λ)
j=1 exp(−S

Algorithm 1 Model Predictive Path Integral Control
Require: Initial state x0 , initial nominal control ū0:H−1
1: for each control iteration do
2:
for k = 1 to N do
3:
Sample control perturbations ϵ(k)
4:
Construct control trajectory u(k) = ū + ϵ(k)
(k)
5:
Roll out system dynamics to obtain {xt }H
t=0
(k)
6:
Compute trajectory cost S
7:
end for
8:
Compute importance weights w(k)
9:
Update nominal control ū0:H−1
10:
Execute first control input and shift horizon
11: end for

For each rollout k, independent Gaussian noise is applied
at the knot points:
(k)

ϵi,j ∼ N (0, σj2 ),

(k)

(k)

uti = ūti + ϵi .

C. MPPI for Whole-Body Control of Legged Robots
This work builds upon the MPPI-based whole-body control
framework introduced in [13], where MPPI is applied directly
to the high-dimensional joint-space control of legged robots. In
that framework, cubic spline parameterization is used to reduce
the effective sampling dimensionality and enforce smoothness
of the control trajectories, enabling real-time execution on
hardware.
Inspired by this formulation, we adopt the same MPPI
structure, cost design, and receding-horizon execution strategy. However, instead of restricting sampling to cubic spline
parameterization, we investigate multiple structured sampling
strategies, including cubic spline, Bézier curve, and linear
interpolation parameterizations. The objective is to isolate
and quantify the impact of the sampling structure on MPPI
performance for legged locomotion tasks.
Importantly, all methods considered in this paper share the
same MPPI update rule and differ only in how stochastic perturbations are mapped to time-continuous control trajectories.
Algorithm 1 summarizes the MPPI procedure used in this
work.
III. D IFFERENT S AMPLING S TRATEGY IN MPPI
ALGORITHM

A. Cubic Spline Sampling
To generate smooth control trajectories with reduced dimensionality, we adopt a cubic spline sampling strategy. Instead
of sampling control inputs at every time step, control values
are sampled at a small number of knot points, and the full
trajectory is reconstructed using cubic spline interpolation.
Let H denote the planning horizon and m the action
dimension. We select K knot indices
T = {t1 , t2 , . . . , tK },

0 = t1 < t2 < · · · < tK = H − 1,
(4)
which are uniformly spaced over the horizon.
Given a nominal control trajectory ū0:H−1 ∈ RH×m , the
corresponding nominal knot values are
i = 1, . . . , K.

(6)

where σj denotes the noise standard deviation for the j-th
action dimension.
The perturbed knot values are given by

where λ > 0 is a temperature parameter controlling the
sharpness of the weighting.

ūti = ū(ti ),

i = 1, . . . , K, j = 1, . . . , m,

(5)

(7)

For each action dimension j, a cubic spline is constructed
by interpolating the perturbed knot values:

(k)
(k)
uj (t) = CubicSpline {(ti , uti ,j )}K
t = 0, . . . , H − 1.
i=1 ,
(8)
Stacking all action dimensions yields the sampled control
trajectory
 (k)
⊤
u(k) (t) = u1 (t), . . . , u(k)
.
(9)
m (t)
Finally, actuator limits are enforced via element-wise clipping:

u(k) (t) ← clip u(k) (t), umin , umax .
(10)
Cubic spline sampling enforces C 2 continuity of the control
trajectory and reduces the sampling dimension from H × m
to K × m.
B. Bézier Curve Sampling
To generate smooth control trajectories with an explicit
low-dimensional parameterization, we employ Bézier curve
sampling. Similar to spline-based sampling, this approach perturbs a reduced set of control points and reconstructs the full
control trajectory through deterministic interpolation. Unlike
cubic splines, Bézier curves provide a global parameterization
via Bernstein polynomial bases.
Let H denote the planning horizon and m the action
dimension. We select K control point indices
T = {t1 , t2 , . . . , tK },

0 = t1 < t2 < · · · < tK = H − 1,
(11)
uniformly distributed over the horizon.
Given a nominal control trajectory ū0:H−1 ∈ RH×m , the
nominal control points are defined as
p̄i = ū(ti ),

i = 1, . . . , K.

(12)

For each rollout k, Gaussian noise is applied independently
to each control point:
(k)

ϵi,j ∼ N (0, σj2 ),

i = 1, . . . , K, j = 1, . . . , m.

(13)

The perturbed control points are given by
(k)

pi

(k)

= p̄i + ϵi .

(14)

The full control trajectory is reconstructed using Bernstein
polynomial basis functions. Let n = K − 1 denote the degree
of the Bézier curve and τ ∈ [0, 1] the normalized time variable.
The Bernstein basis is defined as
 
n i
n
Bi (τ ) =
τ (1 − τ )n−i , i = 0, . . . , n.
(15)
i

The sampled control trajectory for rollout k is given by
n


X
(k)
(k)
t
uj (t) =
pi,j Bin H−1
, t = 0, . . . , H − 1, (16)
i=0

for each action dimension j.
Stacking all action dimensions yields
 (k)
⊤
u(k) (t) = u1 (t), . . . , u(k)
.
m (t)
Finally, actuator limits are enforced via clipping:

u(k) (t) ← clip u(k) (t), umin , umax .

(17)

(18)

Bézier curve sampling reduces the sampling dimension from
H × m to K × m while enforcing global smoothness of the
control trajectory. Compared to cubic spline sampling, Bézier
curves offer a more interpretable parameterization through
explicit control points and guarantee that the trajectory lies
within the convex hull of these points.
C. Linear Interpolation–Based Sampling
In addition to spline-based sampling, we consider a linear
interpolation–based sampling strategy as a low-complexity
baseline within the MPPI framework. The objective is to
reduce the dimensionality of the sampling space while preserving basic temporal structure in the control trajectories, without
enforcing higher-order smoothness constraints.
Let the control horizon be T and the action dimension
be du . Instead of directly sampling the full control sequence
u0:T −1 ∈ RT ×du , we define a set of K waypoints indexed by
I = {i1 , i2 , . . . , iK },

ik ∈ {0, . . . , T − 1},

(19)

where the indices are uniformly distributed over the horizon:


(k − 1)(T − 1)
, k = 1, . . . , K.
(20)
ik =
K −1
The mean waypoints are extracted from the current mean
control trajectory ū as
w̄k = ūik ,

k = 1, . . . , K.

(21)

For each rollout n ∈ {1, . . . , N }, waypoint perturbations
are sampled independently according to
(n)

wk

(n)

= w̄k + ϵk ,

(n)

ϵk

∼ N (0, Σ),

(22)

where Σ = σ 2 I denotes an isotropic covariance.
The full control trajectory is reconstructed via piecewise
linear interpolation between adjacent waypoints:


(n)
(n)
ut = Interp t; {(ik , wk )}K
t = 0, . . . , T − 1,
k=1 ,
(23)
where the interpolation is applied independently along each action dimension. Action bounds are enforced through elementwise clipping:
(n)

ut

(n)

← clip(ut , umin , umax ).

(24)

This approach reduces the stochastic sampling dimension
from T × du to K × du . However, due to the absence of
curvature continuity, the resulting trajectories are less smooth
than those produced by spline-based parameterizations.

IV. S IMULATION R ESULTS : S AMPLING S TRATEGY
C OMPARISON
This section presents a comparative evaluation of different
control sampling parameterizations within the MPPI framework. All experiments are conducted in simulation using a
Unitree-class quadruped robot model and are designed to
isolate the effect of the sampling strategy on locomotion
performance.
A. Experimental Setup
The MPPI controller described in the previous section is
used without modification across all experiments. In particular,
the system dynamics model, cost function design, temperature
parameter, planning horizon, number of rollouts, and control
frequency are kept identical for all methods. The only variation
between experiments lies in how control perturbations are
parameterized and reconstructed over the prediction horizon.
Each control strategy is evaluated on three representative
locomotion tasks of increasing difficulty:
1) Flat-ground walking: straight-line walking on level
terrain toward a goal position.
2) Stair climbing: ascending a staircase with discrete
height changes, requiring sustained vertical motion and
accurate foot placement.
3) Large obstacle traversal: stepping over a tall box
that induces significant kinematic and dynamic coupling
between the robot body and legs.
For each task and sampling strategy, five independent trials
are conducted from identical initial conditions. A trial is
considered successful if the robot reaches the target position
without falling or violating joint or contact constraints.
We present three performance metrics:
• Success rate: the percentage of trials that successfully
reach the goal.
• Steps to goal: the number of control steps required to
reach the target, averaged over successful trials.
• Computation time: the average wall-clock time per MPPI
iteration, measured on the same hardware.
These metrics jointly characterize robustness, control efficiency, and computational cost, which are all critical for realtime whole-body control.
B. Flat-Ground Walking
We first evaluate the proposed sampling parameterizations
on a flat-ground walking task, where the quadruped is commanded to walk straight for a distance of 1.0 m. This scenario
serves as a baseline benchmark to assess gait stability, convergence speed, and computational efficiency in the absence of
environmental disturbances.
Table I summarizes the quantitative results over five trials
per method. The baseline MPPI with independent Gaussian
sampling (Normal) achieves only a 60% success rate and
exhibits the slowest convergence, requiring 1358.0 ± 571.8
steps to reach the goal. The large variance in steps reflects

unstable rollouts and oscillatory joint commands, which frequently prevent reliable forward progression.
In contrast, structured sampling methods that enforce temporal coherence substantially improve both robustness and
convergence. Among them, CubicSpline-k4 achieves a 100%
success rate and converges significantly faster than all other
methods, reaching the goal in 444.0 ± 30.2 steps. This result
indicates that a low-dimensional spline parameterization effectively balances expressiveness and regularization, yielding
smooth and stable control sequences with minimal variance
across trials.
Increasing the spline dimensionality, however, degrades
robustness. While CubicSpline-k8 still improves upon the
baseline in terms of convergence speed, its success rate drops
to 80% and the variance in steps increases substantially
(687.0±661.0), suggesting sensitivity to over-parameterization
under limited sampling budgets. This trend highlights the
importance of controlling the effective dimensionality of the
action space within MPPI.

Fig. 1. Performance radar and efficiency trade-off for flat-ground walking.

Fig. 2. Steps-to-goal and success-rate comparison for different sampling
methods on flat-ground walking.

Alternative structured representations exhibit different tradeoffs. Bezier-cp4 and LinearInterp-w10 both achieve 100%
success rates but require over 1100 steps on average to reach
the goal. Notably, LinearInterp-w10 is the most computationally efficient method, with an average computation time of
21.14 ± 4.17 ms per step, approximately half that of splinebased approaches, albeit at the cost of slower convergence.
These trade-offs are further illustrated in Fig. 2, which
visualizes the relationship between computation time and
convergence speed, and Fig. 1, which provides a normalized performance radar comparison across speed, efficiency, and success rate. Overall, the results demonstrate that
moderate-dimensional spline parameterizations, particularly

CubicSpline-k4, offer the most favorable balance between
convergence speed, robustness, and computational cost for flatground walking.
TABLE I
P ERFORMANCE COMPARISON ON FLAT- GROUND WALKING .
Method
Normal
CubicSpline-k4
CubicSpline-k8
Bezier-cp4
LinearInterp-w10

Success (%)

Steps to Goal

Time (ms)

60
100
80
100
100

1358.0 ± 571.8
444.0 ± 30.2
687.0 ± 661.0
1264.0 ± 163.8
1125.4 ± 174.7

40.05 ± 13.23
40.07 ± 8.70
40.52 ± 11.21
46.19 ± 13.54
21.14 ± 4.17

C. Stair Climbing
We next evaluate the sampling strategies on a stair-climbing
task, where the quadruped ascends a staircase over a forward
distance of 3.3 m. Compared to flat-ground walking, this scenario imposes substantially higher demands on long-horizon
coordination, precise foothold placement, and vertical body
motion, making it a stringent test of temporal consistency in
the sampled control sequences.
Table II reports the quantitative performance over five trials
per method. The baseline MPPI with independent Gaussian
sampling (Normal) fails entirely, achieving a 0% success rate
and consistently reaching the maximum episode length of 4000
steps. Despite its relatively low per-step computation time, the
lack of temporal structure leads to incoherent action sequences
that are unable to sustain stable climbing behavior. A similar
failure mode is observed for Bezier-cp4, which also achieves
a 0% success rate while incurring the highest computational
cost among all methods.
In contrast, spline-based sampling demonstrates a decisive
advantage in this long-horizon task. Both CubicSpline-k4 and
CubicSpline-k8 achieve 100% success rates, reliably completing the stair ascent in approximately 1000 steps on average. Among them, CubicSpline-k4 converges slightly faster,
with 1010.6 ± 232.8 steps compared to 1031.6 ± 332.4 for
CubicSpline-k8, while also exhibiting lower variance. This
result again highlights that moderate-dimensional spline parameterizations provide sufficient expressiveness for complex
maneuvers without introducing unnecessary sensitivity to sampling noise.
The LinearInterp-w10 method achieves partial success, with
a 60% success rate, but requires significantly more steps to
reach the goal (2817.2 ± 1032.3) and exhibits large trialto-trial variability. While its lower computation time makes
it attractive from an efficiency standpoint, the piecewiselinear structure appears insufficient to capture the smooth and
coordinated motion required for reliable stair climbing.
Figure 4 illustrates the trade-off between computation time
and convergence speed, clearly separating successful splinebased methods from failure cases. Figure 3 further summarizes
the normalized performance across convergence speed, efficiency, and success rate. Overall, these results demonstrate that
temporally smooth, low-dimensional spline parameterizations

TABLE II
P ERFORMANCE COMPARISON ON STAIR CLIMBING .
Method
Normal
CubicSpline-k4
CubicSpline-k8
Bezier-cp4
LinearInterp-w10

Fig. 3. Performance radar and efficiency trade-off for the stair-climbing task.

Fig. 4. Steps-to-goal and success-rate comparison for different sampling
methods on the stair-climbing task.

are not merely beneficial but essential for solving contact-rich,
long-horizon locomotion tasks such as stair climbing within
the MPPI framework.
D. Big Box Obstacle Traversal
We finally evaluate the sampling strategies on a large
obstacle traversal task, where the quadruped must step over a
tall box while advancing 1.0 m forward. Unlike stair climbing,
this scenario emphasizes short-horizon, highly coupled wholebody coordination, requiring rapid adaptation of body posture
and foot placement within a limited spatial window.
Table III summarizes the performance over five trials per
method. The baseline MPPI with independent Gaussian sampling (Normal) again fails in all trials, achieving a 0% success
rate and consistently reaching the maximum episode length of
4000 steps. Despite a moderate computation time, the lack
of structured temporal coupling prevents the controller from
producing coordinated lifting and landing motions necessary
to clear the obstacle.
Among all methods, CubicSpline-k4 achieves the best overall performance, with a 100% success rate and the fewest
steps to reach the goal (955.4 ± 739.8). Although the variance
is higher than in flat-ground walking, this is expected due
to the inherently discontinuous contact events during obstacle
traversal. Importantly, CubicSpline-k4 remains both robust and
computationally efficient, with an average computation time of
23.25 ± 5.01 ms per step.
Increasing the spline dimensionality leads to reduced robustness in this task. CubicSpline-k8 achieves an 80% success
rate and requires more steps on average (1332.4 ± 1379.3),
despite being the fastest method in terms of per-step computation time. This result suggests that while higher-dimensional
parameterizations may offer additional flexibility, they can also

Success (%)

Steps to Goal

Time (ms)

0
100
100
0
60

4000.0 ± 0.0
1010.6 ± 232.8
1031.6 ± 332.4
4000.0 ± 0.0
2817.2 ± 1032.3

25.08 ± 5.79
29.34 ± 6.89
30.87 ± 11.61
42.11 ± 11.94
27.04 ± 8.52

introduce unnecessary variability in short-horizon, contact-rich
maneuvers.
The remaining structured methods exhibit intermediate performance. LinearInterp-w10 reaches a 60% success rate with
large variance in steps (2239.4 ± 1461.0), indicating inconsistent obstacle negotiation. Bezier-cp4 performs the worst among
structured approaches, succeeding in only 40% of trials and
often failing to generate sufficiently aggressive or well-timed
motions to clear the obstacle.
Figure 6 illustrates the trade-off between convergence speed
and computational cost, clearly separating successful splinebased methods from failure cases. Figure 5 further provides a
normalized comparison across speed, efficiency, and success
rate. Taken together, these results demonstrate that for shorthorizon but highly coordinated behaviors, such as large obstacle traversal, low-dimensional spline parameterizations again
provide the most favorable balance between expressiveness,
robustness, and sample efficiency within MPPI.

Fig. 5. Performance radar and efficiency trade-off for the big box obstacle
traversal task.

Fig. 6. Steps-to-goal and success-rate comparison for different sampling
methods on the stair-climbing task.

E. Simulation Summary
In summary, the simulation results demonstrate that the
choice of sampling parameterization within the MPPI framework has a pronounced impact on both task performance

TABLE III
P ERFORMANCE COMPARISON ON BIG BOX TRAVERSAL .
Method
Normal
CubicSpline-k4
CubicSpline-k8
Bezier-cp4
LinearInterp-w10

Success (%)

Steps to Goal

Time (ms)

0
100
80
40
60

4000.0 ± 0.0
955.4 ± 739.8
1332.4 ± 1379.3
2932.8 ± 1323.5
2239.4 ± 1461.0

33.36 ± 8.79
23.25 ± 5.01
21.43 ± 3.89
24.40 ± 4.39
22.47 ± 4.58

and robustness across diverse locomotion scenarios. While all
evaluated strategies are capable of generating feasible motions
on flat terrain, clear differences emerge in more challenging environments such as stair climbing and large obstacle
traversal. Parameterizations that better capture the underlying
structure of the control sequence consistently achieve lower
task costs, improved tracking accuracy, and reduced control
variability, particularly under contact-rich and highly nonlinear
dynamics. Moreover, these strategies exhibit superior sample
efficiency, enabling more stable behaviors without increasing
the computational budget. Collectively, these findings indicate
that informed sampling design is a critical factor for scaling
MPPI to complex legged locomotion tasks, and they motivate
the use of structured or low-dimensional sampling spaces when
deploying MPPI on real quadruped platforms.
V. C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE W ORK
This paper investigates the role of sampling strategy design
within the MPPI framework for legged robot locomotion.
Through extensive simulations on a quadruped robot, we
tested and compared MPPI controllers equipped with different control sampling strategies across multiple terrains and
task scenarios. The results demonstrate that, although MPPI
provides a unified stochastic optimal control formulation, its
practical performance on legged robots is strongly influenced
by the choice of sampling parameterization. In particular,
structured sampling strategies lead to improved task performance, enhanced robustness in contact-rich environments, and
increased sample efficiency compared to unstructured sampling approaches. These findings highlight sampling design as
a critical component for effectively applying MPPI to complex
legged locomotion problems.
Building on the insights obtained in this study, future work
will focus on a broader investigation of sampling strategies for optimal control. We aim to analyze how different
sampling parameterizations affect the exploration–exploitation
trade-off, convergence properties, and computational efficiency
of stochastic optimal control algorithms, including but not
limited to MPPI. In addition, we plan to explore adaptive
and learning-based sampling mechanisms that can adjust to
task requirements and system dynamics online. Ultimately, this
line of research seeks to establish principled guidelines for
sampling design that enable scalable and reliable deployment
of sampling-based optimal control methods on real-world
robotic systems.

R EFERENCES
[1] G. Williams, N. Wagener, B. Goldfain, P. Drews, J. M. Rehg, B. Boots,
and E. A. Theodorou, “Information theoretic mpc for model-based
reinforcement learning,” in 2017 IEEE international conference on
robotics and automation (ICRA), pp. 1714–1721, IEEE, 2017.
[2] G. Williams, P. Drews, B. Goldfain, J. M. Rehg, and E. A. Theodorou,
“Information-theoretic model predictive control: Theory and applications
to autonomous driving,” IEEE Transactions on Robotics, vol. 34, no. 6,
pp. 1603–1622, 2018.
[3] E. Theodorou, J. Buchli, and S. Schaal, “A generalized path integral
control approach to reinforcement learning,” The Journal of Machine
Learning Research, vol. 11, pp. 3137–3181, 2010.
[4] G. Williams, A. Aldrich, and E. Theodorou, “Model predictive path
integral control using covariance variable importance sampling,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:1509.01149, 2015.
[5] K. Lowrey, A. Rajeswaran, S. Kakade, E. Todorov, and I. Mordatch,
“Plan online, learn offline: Efficient learning and exploration via modelbased control,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1811.01848, 2018.
[6] M. Hutter, C. Gehring, D. Jud, A. Lauber, C. D. Bellicoso, V. Tsounis,
J. Hwangbo, K. Bodie, P. Fankhauser, M. Bloesch, et al., “Anymala highly mobile and dynamic quadrupedal robot,” in 2016 IEEE/RSJ
international conference on intelligent robots and systems (IROS),
pp. 38–44, IEEE, 2016.
[7] N. Rathod, A. Bratta, M. Focchi, M. Zanon, O. Villarreal, C. Semini,
and A. Bemporad, “Terrain aware model predictive control for legged
locomotion,” 2021.
[8] G. Williams, P. Drews, B. Goldfain, J. M. Rehg, and E. A. Theodorou,
“Aggressive driving with model predictive path integral control,” in
2016 IEEE international conference on robotics and automation (ICRA),
pp. 1433–1440, IEEE, 2016.
[9] I. Chatzinikolaidis, Y. You, and Z. Li, “Contact-implicit trajectory
optimization using an analytically solvable contact model for locomotion
on variable ground,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, vol. 5,
no. 4, pp. 6357–6364, 2020.
[10] S. Gangapurwala, M. Geisert, R. Orsolino, M. Fallon, and I. Havoutis,
“Rloc: Terrain-aware legged locomotion using reinforcement learning
and optimal control,” IEEE Transactions on Robotics, vol. 38, no. 5,
pp. 2908–2927, 2022.
[11] J. T. Betts, Practical methods for optimal control and estimation using
nonlinear programming. SIAM, 2010.
[12] Y. Tassa, N. Mansard, and E. Todorov, “Control-limited differential
dynamic programming,” in 2014 IEEE International Conference on
Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pp. 1168–1175, IEEE, 2014.
[13] J. Alvarez-Padilla, J. Z. Zhang, S. Kwok, J. M. Dolan, and Z. Manchester, “Real-time whole-body control of legged robots with modelpredictive path integral control,” in 2025 IEEE International Conference
on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pp. 14721–14727, IEEE, 2025.
[14] E. Todorov, “Efficient computation of optimal actions,” Proceedings of
the national academy of sciences, vol. 106, no. 28, pp. 11478–11483,
2009.
[15] M. Testouri, G. Elghazaly, and R. Frank, “Towards a safe real-time
motion planning framework for autonomous driving systems: An mppi
approach,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.01654, 2023.
[16] C. Tao, H.-J. Yoon, H. Kim, N. Hovakimyan, and P. Voulgaris, “Path
integral methods with stochastic control barrier functions,” in 2022 IEEE
61st Conference on Decision and Control (CDC), pp. 1654–1659, IEEE,
2022.
[17] F. Wang, H. Jiang, C. Tao, W. Wan, and Y. Cheng, “Dbas-log-mppi:
Efficient and safe trajectory optimization via barrier states,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2504.06437, 2025.
[18] C. Tao, H. Kim, H.-J. Yoon, P. Voulgaris, and N. Hovakimyan, “Guided
sampling-based motion planning algorithm for dynamic and obstacle
cluttered environments,” Journal of Guidance, Control, and Dynamics,
pp. 1–18, 2025.
[19] Y. Cheng, P. Zhao, F. Wang, D. J. Block, and N. Hovakimyan, “Improving the robustness of reinforcement learning policies with L1 adaptive
control,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 6574–
6581, 2022.
[20] Y. Cheng, P. Zhao, and N. Hovakimyan, “Safe and efficient reinforcement learning using disturbance-observer-based control barrier functions,” in Learning for Dynamics and Control Conference, pp. 104–115,
PMLR, 2023.

