ETH Library

ANYmal - A Highly Mobile and
Dynamic Quadrupedal Robot
Conference Paper
Author(s):
Hutter, Marco ; Gehring, Christian; Jud, Dominic; Lauber, Andreas; Bellicoso, C. Dario; Tsounis, Vassilios; Hwangbo, Jemin;
Bodie, Karen; Fankhauser, Peter; Bloesch, Michael; Diethelm, Remo; Bachmann, Samuel; Melzer, Amir; Hoepflinger, Mark
Publication date:
2016
Permanent link:
https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.3929/ethz-a-010686165
Rights / license:
In Copyright - Non-Commercial Use Permitted
Originally published in:
https://doi.org/10.1109/IROS.2016.7758092

This page was generated automatically upon download from the ETH Zurich Research Collection.
For more information, please consult the Terms of use.

ANYmal - A Highly Mobile and Dynamic Quadrupedal Robot*
Marco Hutter1 , Christian Gehring2 , Dominic Jud1 , Andreas Lauber1 , C. Dario Bellicoso1 , Vassilios Tsounis1 ,
Jemin Hwangbo1 , Karen Bodie 1 , Peter Fankhauser1 , Michael Bloesch2 , Remo Diethelm2 , Samuel Bachmann2 ,
Amir Melzer 1 , Mark Hoepflinger 1

Abstract— This paper introduces ANYmal, a quadrupedal
robot that features outstanding mobility and dynamic motion
capability. Thanks to novel, compliant joint modules with
integrated electronics, the 30 kg, 0.5 m tall robotic dog is torque
controllable and very robust against impulsive loads during
running or jumping. The presented machine was designed
with a focus on outdoor suitability, simple maintenance, and
user-friendly handling to enable future operation in real world
scenarios. Performance tests with the joint actuators indicated a
torque control bandwidth of more than 70 Hz, high disturbance
rejection capability, as well as impact robustness when moving
with maximal velocity. It is demonstrated in a series of experiments that ANYmal can execute walking gaits, dynamically trot
at moderate speed, and is able to perform special maneuvers
to stand up or crawl very steep stairs. Detailed measurements
unveil that even full-speed running requires less than 280 W,
resulting in an autonomy of more than 2 h.

I. I NTRODUCTION
Legged robotics has potential advantages in terms of
mobility and versatility as compared to tracked or wheeled
vehicles. So far, the technological complexity to build and
control such vehicles has prevented these systems from being
applied in real world scenarios and only few teams managed
to develop machines that work beyond laboratory test-bench
settings. With major advances over the recent years, pushed
by various large scale research programs or investment
from industry, our community is about to overcome the last
technical hurdles and make legged robots available for real
world applications. Most prominently, the DARPA Robotics
Challenge (DRC) brought together some of the best research
groups in the field of humanoid robots to successfully use
such machines in a disaster mitigation scenario [1]. Since
the scenario is very close to reality, all teams were forced
to massively invest in hardware development to improve
not only versatility but also reliability and ruggedness of
the robots. These developments resulted in many highperformance machines like ATLAS[2], Valkyrie [3], DRC
Hubo [4], HRP2+ [5], Walkman and others, most of them
based on earlier robot versions. This new generation of
humanoid robots commonly feature some sort of force or
torque control - either by integrated load cells in the joints
or at the end-effector, or by a series elasticity in every
*This work was supported in part by the Swiss National Science
Foundation (SNF) through the National Centre of Competence in Research
Robotics, by the EC’s 7th Famework ECHORD++ Project Module, and by
TOTAL SA through the ARGOS Challenge.
1 Authors are with the Robotic Systems Lab, ETH Zurich, Switzerland,

mahutter@ethz.ch
2 Authors are with the Autonomous Systems Lab, ETH Zurich, Switzerland.

Fig. 1. ANYmal, an autonomous quadrupedal robot for rough terrain
operation

actuator. This allows them to properly control interaction
forces with the environment and hence to balance the system
or manipulate the environment.
Despite all these advances, the locomotory performance
of the human-like robots is still far behind the natural
counterparts. All these robots are relatively slow, require a
lot of power, and can only negotiate small terrain obstacles.
Better locomotion performance in terms of speed, energetic efficiency, and obstacle negotiation skills, is achieved
with multi-legged systems. Paramount example is Boston
Dynamics’ Spot robot, a direct successor of Big Dog [6], of
which unfortunately no scientific publications are available.
Similar locomotion performance, demonstrated in various
highly dynamic gaits and maneuvers, was also achieved
by research groups around IIT’s hydraulic HyQ [7] and its
follower HyQ2max [8], MIT’s directly electrically actuated
cheetah [9], or ETH’s serial elastic robot StarlETH [10].
All these robots have demonstrated dynamic running on
different grounds or to dynamically overcome obstacles however, none of these machines has been used in a real
world application.
This paper presents ANYmal (Fig. 1), a highly mobile

Fig. 3.

Fig. 2.

Main components of ANYmal

and rugged quadrupedal platform developed for autonomous
operation in challenging environments. ANYmal was designed to combine outstanding mobility with dynamic motion
capability that enables it to climb large obstacles as well as
to dynamically run. This completely autonomous machine
paves the road for real world applications. It is in use for
the NCCR Search and Rescue grand challenge1 as well as
in the ARGOS oil and gas site inspection challenge2 - both
scenarios with very harsh and demanding environments. In
the following, we present the underlying mechanics and
actuation concept, illustrate the electronics and software
setup, sketch out the applied locomotion control algorithms
with appropriate references to their implementation, and
finally summarize the paper with a series of experiments3
highlighting the overall system performance.
II. S YSTEM DESCRIPTION
ANYmal was specifically built for long endurance autonomous operation in harsh environments. Focus was put
on large mobility, fast and dynamic locomotion skills, high
robustness, simple maintenance, and safe handling by a
single operator.
A. Overview
The presented quadrupedal robot, with the main components depicted in Fig. 2, features three actuated joints per leg
with point feet. With an approximate link length of 250 mm
for thigh and shank, and a total weight of slightly less than
30 kg, it resembles a medium-sized dog. To achieve this
lightweight design, the main body and the leg segments are
built from aluminum and carbon fiber. Onboard batteries of
about 650 Wh energy and 3 kg weight provide power for
more than 2 h autonomous operation. A protection frame
and pads at the legs prevent the system from damage when
falling and allows for handy transportation and deployment.
1 http://www.argos-challenge.com
2 http://www.nccr-robotics.ch/RescueRobots
3 for illustration, see http://www.rsl.ethz.ch/robots-media/anymal

Range of motion of a single leg of ANYmal

Optofoce sensors are used as tactile feet and rotating Hokuyo
UTM-30LX sensors provide 3D perception of the environment. To make ANYmal applicable for different scenarios,
a modular pan-tilt head with variable sensory payload can
be mounted. For example, in the setup for the ARGOS
challenge, the sensory head includes an optical zoom and
thermal camera for visual inspection, a gas detection sensor,
microphones for sound identification, as well as artificial
lighting.
B. Modular joint setup
Key to simultaneously achieving the design goals are
the robotic joint units described in Sec. III. This enabled
the creation of a very simple mechanical topology with
three equal joint units per leg that are linked by rigid
mechanical segments and interconnected with a power and
communication bus. Since the encapsulated and sealed joint
units integrate drive electronics and sensing, as well as the
joint axle bearing, the robot does not require any additional
bearings, transmission, proprioceptive sensors, or electronics
in its legs. Such a setup combines several advantages: Given
the drive units, the robot is simple to manufacture, assemble,
and maintain. In case of failure, a complete joint can be
quickly exchanged. Furthermore, design variations to build
different robots requires only to change the mechanical links.
The joint arrangement of ANYmal is chosen mammalian
with successive hip abduction/adduction (HAA), hip flexion/extension (HFE), and knee flexion/extension (KFE). In
contrast to its predecessor StarlETH [10], the MIT cheetah
[9], IIT HyQ [7], Big Dog [6] or other legged systems, the
leg links of ANYmal are built with an offset such that all
joints can be fully rotated. So far, this was typically only
done in walking machines like JPL’s robosimian [11] that
moves in a quasi static manner. As depicted in Fig. 3, the
joint offset enables a huge range of motion which is key to
high mobility. With this, ANYmal is able to use its feet high
above ground for tasks like opening a door or surmounting
large obstacles, it can be folded for transport or deployment,
and can change its leg configuration (Fig. 4).
C. Main body package
Computers, batteries, network devices, the power management system, and basic navigation sensors are integrated in
a single box-shaped and ingress protected main body. Three

Fig. 5.
The software architecture with clear real-time priority ranked
separation on different PCs.

A. A brief review on existing actuation concepts
Fig. 4.
tions.

Full rotation in all joints of ANYmal allow for various configura-

intel NUC PCs connected over an internal gigabit network
form the removable brain of ANYmal that is accessible
via WiFi link from any operator machine. To get proper
heat dissipation from the sealed main body, all components
are thermally coupled to the main body which is used as
heat sink. The main body is controlled from a small touch
screen on the back of the robot which allows to individually
enable PCs and sensors. A rotating Hokuyo UTM-30lx laser
sensor and an Xsens MTi-100 IMU are fixedly installed for
localization, navigation, and environment mapping.
D. Software architecture
The three PCs share the work load of the locomotion,
navigation and inspection tasks as illustrated in Fig. 5. The
data is transferred over the network by the Robot Operating
System (ROS) running on a low-latency patched Ubuntu
14.04. The ROS master, which manages the connections
between the different processes, runs on the locomotion
PC. The real-time critical whole-body controller and state
estimator are timed by the CAN driver that communicates
with the actuator units at 400 Hz. The readings and commands are exchanged through shared memory and published
through ROS to less time-critical workers like the foothold
planner. The localization and mapping tasks are outsourced
to the navigation PC that is responsible for the laser-based
localization and mapping of the environment. High-level
navigation tasks are coordinated by a mission planner and
executed by a path planner that sends velocity commands
to the locomotion controller. Optionally, a third application
specific PC can be activated to handle for example the
computationally extensive video processing for inspection.
III. ANY DRIVE - M ODULAR JOINT UNITS
Dynamic locomotion imposes very demanding requirements on the actuation system, namely:
• High impact robustness
• Fast motion tracking
• Low impedance force controllability
Furthermore, actuators must be lightweight and energetically
as efficient as possible.

The classical approach of electric motors with highreduction mechanical gears as employed in almost all industrial robot arms does not satisfy the first requirement.
Legged robots using such actuation approach are limited to
slow and static locomotion in order to prevent the actuators
from impulsive forces. For dynamic locomotion, three major
concepts have established as adequate actuation technology.
1) Hydraulic actuation: Hydraulic actuators as used in
machines like HyQ [7], BigDog [6] or Atlas [2] are naturally
robust against impulsive loads and provide extremely high
power and force density. Thanks to very fast valve units
in combination with load cells for force measurement or
pressure based force estimation [12], hydraulic actuators
provide also high performance torque control.
On the negative side, hydraulic systems tend to be energetically inefficient, in particular when operated with constant
pressure. For this reason, many systems used in research
still rely on off-board supply. At the cost of increased
system complexity, this can be overcome to certain extent
by sophisticated pumps and variable pressure levels. Another
problem is scalability which makes hydraulic legged systems
rather large and heavy.
2) Pseudo-direct-drive systems: When using gearing systems of very low reduction and high efficiency, electric actuators can become very transparent and the reflected inertia
of the actuation compared to the output becomes small. As a
result, motor current control, which can be done at very high
bandwidth, is equivalent to regulation of the output force
[13]. These benefits have been exploited for many years in
rehabilitation engineering and for haptic devices. Thanks to
recent advances in actuator development, pseudo-direct-drive
concepts find application in high-dynamic legged robots as
in the example of MIT-cheetah [9], which is able to run and
jump at high speeds.
Unfortunately, while electric motors have extremely high
power, their torque is limited. Therefore, direct actuation
without any gear is not possible with existing technology.
Furthermore, motors of large diameter must be used to create
high forces, which largely limits flexibility in system design.
3) Series elastic actuation: Inspired from biology and
along the seminal work of Pratt [14], the third common actuation approach for legged robots are series elastic actuators.

Fig. 6. ANYdrive: Compact, compliant joint units for advanced interaction

Position Control

des

θj

eθ

+

PID τ

-

des

Torque Control

1
N KT
eτ

+
-

+

PID +

i des
+

+

θg

SEA

-

θj

Friction
Compensation

+

θ̇ j

k

[20], which is also the basis of the control of Valkyrie [15],
we realized a simple PID torque feedback loop with feedback
friction compensation. The position PID control builds upon
the torque controller as an additional cascade.
The torque controller tracks a desired torque τ des by
measuring the actual output torque τ and setting the desired
current ides accordingly. The spring deflection is calculated
from the difference in the joint position θj and the gear
position θg . The output torque τ is then calculated using
the spring constant k. The torque controller consists of three
elements, i.e. a PID controller, a feed forward term and a
feedback friction compensation. The feed forward term is
determined from the inverse of the gear ratio N and the
motor constant KT , both typically provided in by data sheets.
The friction compensation

τ

d
dt

Fig. 7. Block diagram of the cascaded joint position and torque control
loop. The SEA block represents the physical actuator unit including field
oriented control (FOC) to apply the desired current ides

By integrating a carefully selected mechanical compliance
between the gearbox output and joint, classical geared motors
can be adapted for applications with dynamic interactions.
Several state of the art robots like the humanoid Valkyrie
[15] or the quadruped StarlETH [10] showed how to use
such actuators not only for precise output force regulation,
but even to temporarily store energy during locomotion and
hence to increase locomotion efficiency [16]. In order to
simplify the use of such actuators, different groups target
the development of modular units [17], [18].
The mechanical compliance in the system is not only a
low pass filter (and hence protection) for the impact loads
at the output, but additionally limits control bandwidth and
requires careful design of the joint level control structure.
B. Overview
ANYdrive (Fig. 6), the joint units of ANYmal, is a
highly integrated series elastic actuator. It is built upon high
torque motors and harmonic drive gears in series with a
rotational spring. Joint output position and spring deflection
are measured using absolute position sensors providing a position accuracy of 0.025◦ and a torque resolution of 0.08 Nm.
Thanks to integrated custom motor control electronics, the
joint torque, position, and impedance can be directly regulated without any additional components. The corresponding
command values are sent over CAN bus using CANopen
standard. With a nominal voltage of 48 V, the joint reaches
a speed of 12 rad/s and a maximal torque of 40 Nm.
C. Control structure
Joint torque, position and impedance control is realized as
a cascaded structure that considers the motor as torque source
(c.f. [19]) as illustrated in Fig. 7. Similar to the work by Paine

icomp (θ̇j ) = iba sSign(θ̇j , θ̇band ) + µθ̇j

(1)

takes two effects into account, namely stiction and viscous
friction. Firstly the break-away current iba is modeled as
Coulomb friction. To prevent undesired switching around the
zero velocity point, it is implemented as simple smooth sign
function


if x < xb
−1,
sSign(x, xb ) = 1,
if x > xb


x+xb 2
x
−1 + 2( 2xb ) (2 − xb ), otherwise
(2)
Secondly, the joint velocity dependent viscous friction is
linearly modeled with the friction coefficient µ. All these
parameters can be experimentally identified from very few
measurements.
The position controller is a PID controller that tracks
a desired joint position θjdes by setting a desired torque
τ des . An important note is that the position gains are highly
depending on the output load since there is no knowledge
about the joint load in the control architecture.
D. Performance evaluation
The performance of ANYdrive with respect to torque and
position reference tracking as well as impulsive disturbance
rejection is evaluated on a single axis test bench. As illustrated in Fig. 8, the bandwidth for low amplitudes is as high
as 70 Hz. Due to motor saturation effects, the bandwidth
gradually decreases to 24 Hz for 10 Nm amplitude. These
performance values are substantially higher than what was
achieved with our previous system [21] and about the same
as in Valkyrie [15]. Interestingly, this high performance was
achievable without a disturbance observer as used in [22].
As illustrated in Fig. 9, the controller is very reactive
showing a 90% settling time of 13 ms for a step of 10 Nm
and 35 ms for a step of 40 Nm with only small overshoot.
Disturbance rejection to impulsive loads is evaluated in
a collision test. To this end, a pendulum is mounted at the
output and the actuator is requested to produce zero torque.
The free swinging pendulum is crashed with high velocity
into a hard wall and brought to instantaneous rest (ideal
plastic collision with a restitution coefficient of zero). Despite

Fig. 10. Joint torque during impulsive collision. The motor velocity is
scaled with the gear ratio for plotting purposes.

Fig. 8. Experimentally identified torque control transfer function indicating
a bandwidth of 70 Hz.

Fig. 11. Zero torque tracking error (blue) when the output joint is randomly
moved by hand (red).

Fig. 9.
Torque step responses show a quick response time and low
overshoot.

high motor speed before the collision, the motor produces
only little torque during the impact (Fig. 10). In fact, already
2 ms after the collision, the motor maximally decelerates to
keep the torque in the spring as small as possible. Due to
the motor and gearbox inertia, it takes about 10 ms to bring
the motor to a complete rest. If the pendulum collides with
the maximal motor velocity, the peak force is smaller than
7 Nm. This implies that, whatever collision a system that is
built from these joint units experiences, forces occurring at
the gear never exceed the peak loads it is rated for. In other
words, the drive is ”perfectly robust” against self inflicted
collisions.
As final performance evaluation experiment, the actuator
was again commanded to produce zero torque while the output is randomly moved by hand (Fig. 11). Despite very large
disturbances (2 rad amplitude and about 4 Hz motion), the
output torque can be kept at less than 0.2 Nm. A qualitative
comparison to Valkyrie [3] indicates a significantly better
disturbance rejection performance.
IV. L OCOMOTION C ONTROL
Since ANYmal is fully torque controllable and of similar geometry as its predecessor StarlETH [10], locomotion
control could be transferred relatively directly. A detailed
description would go beyond the scope of this paper, we

refer the interested reader to the related work introduced in
the following.
ANYmal features a purely proprioceptive state estimation
based on fusion of IMU, leg kinematics, and ground contact
measurements [23], [24]. For static walking gaits, a ZMP
planner [25] is implemented to plan a smooth main body
trajectory while applying a standard crawling gait [26].
Foothold placement during dynamic gaits is based on simplified inverted pendulum models [27]. To balance the system,
we build upon whole body control techniques that accounts
for the complete system kinematics and dynamics [28], [29].
The optimal actuator commands are found at every time step
by solving a constrained optimization problem of prioritized
tasks and constraints on joint torques, contact forces, and
body motion.
V. E XPERIMENTS
The performance of ANYmal was tested in different maneuvers and locomotion experiments illustrated in Fig. 124 .
In order to ensure fast and stable locomotion, particular
attention was paid to accurate swing leg position and stance
leg force tracking, as well as good following behavior of the
target base motion.
A. Walking
ANYmal is able to perform a very smooth walking gait,
whereby a single leg is moved at the time and the base is
shifted in order to maintain balance. As illustrated in Fig. 13,
joint torques and positions are followed very accurately
during the entire gait cycle and hence also the base position
can be accurately moved according to the preplanned trajectory. It is important to know that the latter follows only
from virtual model control (task space control) at the base
4 For videos, see http://www.rsl.ethz.ch/robots-media/anymal

(a) Walking
Fig. 12.

(b) Trotting

(c) Stair Climbing

ANYmal was tested in different gaits like walking, trotting, or stair climbing
8
measured
desired

knee joint position [rad]

1.3
1.2
1.1
1
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5

0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

knee joint velocity [rad/s]

1.4

measured
desired

6
4
2
0
-2
-4
-6
-8

0

0.1

0.2

time [s]

Fig. 14.
joint.

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

time [s]

Tracking performance of the position and velocity of the knee

10

49

350

300

8

48
4

250

200

power [W]

Torque and position tracking while walking.

6

voltage [V]

Fig. 13.

current [A]

48.5

150

47.5

and without any joint position or impedance regulation. By
applying a classical ZMP planner [25], forward locomotion
results in a very smooth and almost straight line of the base
as illustrated in the movie. In such gait, the robot moves with
approximately 0.3 m/s. Thanks to the full rotation capability,
the motion planner does not have to account for complex
geometric collision constraints but only for limited abduction
freedom due to the main body. Furthermore, ANYmal can
take fairly big steps.
B. Trotting
ANYmal is able to trot on different grounds and under
large external disturbances. Similar to the walking gait,
already the first experiments unveiled large advantages of the
big range of motion as the legs can be moved relatively far
in all directions. Using a 50% duty cycle gait, the machine
achieves a speed of about 0.8 m/s. Key to robust trotting
is fast and accurate position tracking. For a typical joint
motion of a fast gait (Fig. 14), joint positions and velocities
are followed accurately despite the joint compliance. A
thorough evaluation of the overall energy consumption at
the onboard battery indicated a relatively low consumption
even during dynamic trotting gait. As depicted in Fig. 15,
ANYmal requires in average about 290 W with about 5%

2

100

trotting
0

0

50

100

150

200

250

300

350

400

450

47
500

50

time [s]

Fig. 15.

Power consumption during trotting.

fluctuation when trotting, about 100 W is consumed while
idling in standing configuration. The total power consumption corresponds to a cost of transport of about 1.2. These
measurements are comparable to our previous results with
StarlETH [30] and enables the machine to autonomously run
for more than 2 h with its current batteries.
C. Stair Climbing
As a proof of high mobility, ANYmal was tested for the
ability to get up an industrial ladder of about 50◦ . To do
this in a save manner and to prevent falling by all possible
means, a turtle like crawling gait was implemented. The main
body lies on the ground, the legs are moved to find the
next stable contact holds, and the machine is subsequently
pulled upwards (see Fig. 12(c)). Due to ANYmal’s large
range of motion, the legs can be literally turned overhead
to prevent collision with the ground or side rails. This
maneuver was inspired by our work with ALoF, a kinematic
quadrupedal robot that was developed for the ESA Lunar

Robotic Challenge [31]. This machine successfully exhibited
such gait to reliably overcome steep inclinations with loose
sand during a moon testing scenario on a volcano.
VI. C ONCLUSION /F UTURE WORK
ANYmal is considered a step towards unification of high
mobility with dynamic locomotion capability.
From the beginning of the design phase, special attention
was put on a rugged and simple to maintain system. This
was achieved with the modular joint units ANYdrive that
allow to very simply create robots of different kinematic
structure. In case of failure, these modules can be easily
and quickly exchanged without special knowledge. These
actuators are based on a series elastic concept as already
implemented on StarlETH, where we did not have a single
gearbox failure in 4 years of almost daily operation with
high-dynamic maneuvers. The presented experiments support
the claim of robustness since even completely plastic and
unexpected output collisions do not lead to higher gearbox
loads than during nominal operation.
Beside the highly improved protection, the biggest advantage of ANYmal is clearly the outstanding range of motion
in all joints. This enables a large variety of maneuvers to
overcome obstacles or to get up after falling. Furthermore, it
simplifies motion planning as there are less internal system
constraints. The initial objectives of creating a dynamic
and highly mobile autonomous walking machine could be
confirmed in preliminary experiments including careful stair
climbing, ZMP-based walking and dynamic trotting. The
present development shall enable deployment of legged
robots in real world scenarios such as for search and rescue
or industrial inspection.
R EFERENCES
[1] DRC,
“DARPA
Robotics
Challenge
(DRC)
,
http://www.theroboticschallenge.org/.”
[2] Boston
Dynamics,
“ATLAS
Robot
http://www.bostondynamics.com/robot Atlas.html.”
[3] N. A. Radford et al., “Valkyrie: NASA’s First Bipedal Humanoid
Robot,” Journal of Field Robotics, vol. 32, no. 3, pp. 397–419, 2015.
[4] H. Wang, Y. F. Zheng, Y. Jun, and P. Oh, “DRC-hubo walking on
rough terrains,” in IEEE International Conference on Technologies
for Practical Robot Applications (TePRA), 2014.
[5] K. Kaneko et al., “Humanoid robot HRP-2Kai Improvement of HRP-2
towards disaster response tasks,” in 2015 IEEE-RAS 15th International
Conference on Humanoid Robots (Humanoids), pp. 132–139, 2015.
[6] M. Raibert, K. Blankespoor, G. Nelson, and R. Playter, “BigDog,
the rough-terrain quadruped robot,” in Proceedings of the 17th World
Congress, pp. 10823–10825, 2008.
[7] C. Semini, N. G. Tsagarakis, E. Guglielmino, M. Focchi, F. Cannella,
and D. G. Caldwell, “Design of HyQ – a hydraulically and electrically
actuated quadruped robot,” Proceedings of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers, Part I: Journal of Systems and Control Engineering,
vol. 225, no. 6, pp. 831–849, 2011.
[8] C. Semini, V. Barasuol, T. Boaventura, M. Frigerio, M. Focchi, D. G.
Caldwell, and J. Buchli, “Towards versatile legged robots through
active impedance control,” The International Journal of Robotics
Research, vol. 34, no. 7, pp. 1003–1020, 2015.
[9] S. Seok, A. Wang, D. Otten, J. Lang, and S. Kim, “Design principles
for highly efficient quadrupeds and implementation on the MIT
Cheetah robot,” in IEEE International Conference on Robotics and
Automation (ICRA), pp. 3307–3312, 2013.

[10] M. Hutter, C. Gehring, M. Bloesch, M. H. Hoepflinger, C. D. Remy,
and R. Siegwart, “StarlETH: a Compliant Quadrupedal Robot for Fast,
Efficient, and Versatile Locomotion,” in International Conference on
Climbing and Walking Robots (CLAWAR), pp. 483–490, 2012.
[11] P. Hebert et al., “Mobile Manipulation and Mobility as ManipulationDesign and Algorithms of RoboSimian,” Journal of Field Robotics,
vol. 32, no. 2, pp. 255–274, 2015.
[12] T. C. Boaventura, Hydraulic Compliance Control of the Quadruped
Robot HyQ. PhD thesis, University of Genoa, Italy and Istituto Italiano
di Tecnologia (IIT), 2013.
[13] S. Seok, A. Wang, D. Otten, and S. Kim, “Actuator design for high
force proprioceptive control in fast legged locomotion,” in IEEE/RSJ
International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS),
pp. 1970–1975, 2012.
[14] G. A. Pratt and M. M. Williamson, “Series elastic actuators,” in IEEE
International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS),
pp. 399–406, MIT, 1995.
[15] N. Paine, J. Holley, G. Johnson, and L. Sentis, “Actuator Control for
the NASA-JSC Valkyrie Humanoid Robot : A Decoupled Dynamics
Approach for Torque Control of Series Elastic Robots,” Journal of
Field Robotics, 2014.
[16] M. Hutter, C. D. Remy, M. A. Hoepflinger, and R. Siegwart, “Efficient
and Versatile Locomotion with Highly Compliant Legs,” IEEE/ASME
Transactions on Mechatronics, vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 449–458, 2013.
[17] D. Rollinson et al., “Design and architecture of a series elastic snake
robot,” in IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots
and Systems (IROS), pp. 4630–4636, 2014.
[18] J. Paskarbeit, S. Annunziata, D. Basa, and A. Schneider, “A selfcontained, elastic joint drive for robotics applications based on a
sensorized elastomer couplingDesign and identification,” Sensors and
Actuators A: Physical, vol. 199, pp. 56–66, sep 2013.
[19] G. A. Pratt, P. Willisson, C. Bolton, and A. Hofman, “Late motor
processing in low-impedance robots: impedance control of serieselastic actuators,” in American Control Conference (ACC), vol. 4,
pp. 3245–3251, 2004.
[20] N. A. Paine, High-Performance Series Elastic Actuation. PhD thesis,
The University of Texas at Austin, 2014.
[21] M. Hutter, C. D. Remy, M. H. Hoepflinger, and R. Siegwart, “High
Compliant Series Elastic Actuation for the Robotic Leg ScarlETH,” in
International Conference on Climbing and Walking Robots (CLAWAR),
(Paris, Fr), pp. 507–514, 2011.
[22] N. Paine, S. Oh, and L. Sentis, “Design and Control Considerations for
High-Performance Series Elastic Actuators,” IEEE/ASME Transactions
on Mechatronics, vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 1080–1091, 2014.
[23] M. Bloesch, M. Hutter, M. Hoepflinger, S. Leutenegger, C. Gehring,
C. D. Remy, and R. Siegwart, “State Estimation for Legged Robots Consistent Fusion of Leg Kinematics and IMU,” in Robotics Science
and Systems (RSS), pp. 17–24, 2012.
[24] M. Bloesch, C. Gehring, P. Fankhauser, M. Hutter, M. A. Hoepflinger,
and R. Siegwart, “State estimation for legged robots on unstable and
slippery terrain,” in IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent
Robots and Systems (IROS), pp. 6058–6064, 2013.
[25] M. Vukobratovic and D. Juricic, “Contribution to the synthesis of
biped gait,” IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering, no. 1,
1969.
[26] R. B. McGhee, “Some finite state aspects of legged locomotion,”
Mathematical Biosciences, vol. 2, no. 1-2, pp. 67–84, 1968.
[27] C. Gehring et al., “Towards Automatic Discovery of Agile Gaits for
Quadrupedal Robots,” in IEEE International Conference on Robotics
and Automation (ICRA), pp. 4243–4248, 2014.
[28] M. Hutter, H. Sommer, C. Gehring, M. Hoepflinger, M. Bloesch, and
R. Siegwart, “Quadrupedal locomotion using hierarchical operational
space control,” The International Journal of Robotics Research (IJRR),
vol. 33, pp. 1062–1077, may 2014.
[29] C. Gehring et al., “Practice Makes Perfect: An Optimization-Based
Approach to Controlling Agile Motions for a Quadruped Robot,” IEEE
Robotics & Automation Magazine, vol. 23, no. 1, pp. 34–43, 2016.
[30] M. Hutter, C. Gehring, M. A. Hopflinger, M. Blosch, and R. Siegwart,
“Toward Combining Speed, Efficiency, Versatility, and Robustness in
an Autonomous Quadruped,” IEEE Transactions on Robotics, vol. 30,
pp. 1427–1440, dec 2014.
[31] C. D. Remy et al., “Walking and crawling with ALoF: a robot for autonomous locomotion on four legs,” Industrial Robot: An International
Journal, vol. 38, no. 3, pp. 264–268, 2011.

