ETH Library

Robust Rough-Terrain Locomotion
with a Quadrupedal Robot
Conference Paper
Author(s):
Fankhauser, Péter; Bjelonic, Marko; Bellicoso, Dario; Miki, Takahiro; Hutter, Marco
Publication date:
2018
Permanent link:
https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.3929/ethz-b-000244079
Rights / license:
In Copyright - Non-Commercial Use Permitted
Originally published in:
https://doi.org/10.1109/ICRA.2018.8460731

This page was generated automatically upon download from the ETH Zurich Research Collection.
For more information, please consult the Terms of use.

Robust Rough-Terrain Locomotion with a Quadrupedal Robot
Péter Fankhauser, Marko Bjelonic, C. Dario Bellicoso, Takahiro Miki and Marco Hutter

Abstract— Robots working in natural, urban, and industrial
settings need to be able to navigate challenging environments.
In this paper, we present a motion planner for the perceptive rough-terrain locomotion with quadrupedal robots. The
planner finds safe footholds along with collision-free swing-leg
motions by leveraging an acquired terrain map. To this end,
we present a novel pose optimization approach that enables the
robot to climb over significant obstacles. We experimentally
validate our approach with the quadrupedal robot ANYmal
by autonomously traversing obstacles such steps, inclines, and
stairs. The locomotion planner re-plans the motion at every
step to cope with disturbances and dynamic environments. The
robot has no prior knowledge of the scene, and all mapping,
state estimation, control, and planning is performed in real-time
onboard the robot.

I. I NTRODUCTION
In the quest to get robots working on real-world tasks,
many challenges have to be overcome. One of the fundamental requirement is the robot’s ability to move in the designated environment safely. Our work focusses on quadrupedal
robots to advance to places which traditional wheel- and
track-based robots cannot reach. With legs, a robot can climb
over difficult terrain by selectively choosing safe footholds
and using all joints to move the limbs around obstacles and
to adapt the posture to the terrain. To plan these climbing
motions, the robot needs to understand its environment to
select footholds and to avoid collisions. Once planned, the
motions need to be executed robustly, and disturbances need
to be compensated to prevent divergence from the planned
motion. Finally, while moving, the robot needs to keep track
of its pose relative to the environment continuously.
In this work, our focus lies on the planning and execution
of climbing motions over rough terrain with a quadrupedal
robot. As rough terrain, we refer to ground with various
obstacles with a height up to 40 % of the robot’s leg length.
Fig. 1 shows a set of stairs as one example of this type of
terrain. Building up on our previous work on control [1], state
estimation [2] and terrain mapping [3], we combine these
elements to a fully integrated system, capable of traversing
difficult terrain. We emphasize the robustness and mean
that the task is achieved in a realistic scenario without any
previous knowledge or external equipment:
• The environment is previously unseen, and the robot has
to perceive, plan, and adapt its motion as it travels. The
robot might be disturbed, and the environment might
change during locomotion.
The authors are with the Robotics Systems Lab (RSL), ETH Zurich,
Switzerland, peterfankhauser@me.com
This work has been conducted as part of ANYmal Research, a community
to advance legged robotics.

Fig. 1. The robot ANYmal [4] climbing a set of standardized stairs (17 cm
× 29 cm). With help of onboard sensors, a terrain map is generated to plan
the footholds (red dots) and base and leg motions (red lines). A video is
available at https://youtu.be/CpzQu25iLa0.

All sensing and computation is onboard, and the robot
runs fully self-contained. Sensors and actuators are
corrupted by noise, drift, and delay and we take no
assumptions on any ‘perfect’ data.
• All algorithms run real-time in the sense that the robot
never stops to ‘think’ about the next steps.
•

Under these requirements, only a few systems have been
presented. Most prominently are Boston Dynamics’ Spot
and SpotMini robots, which have been shown to traverse
difficult terrain including stairs at a high pace. However, very
little information about this technology and the experimental
setup is available. A few research groups have been working
on the control and planning for the LittleDog robot (e.g.,
[5, 6, 7]). While impressive performances were shown, the
approaches relied on an external motion capture system
and high resolution pre-scanned terrain models. Recent advances towards a fully integrated system were published
for the Messor II robot [8]. This work uses an A* guided
Rapidly-exploring Random Tree (RRT)-based planner to find
a kinematic plan, integrating foothold selection and motion
planning in one sampling-based planner. While some results
have been shown in combination with online state estimation
and mapping, the robot is tethered to an external computation
and power source, and no information about obstacle height
and execution speed is given. Closest to our approach is the
work on the hydraulic quadruped HyQ (90 kg, 1 m height)
by [9, 10, 11]. While still tethered, the robot has shown
autonomous climbing over previously unseen obstacles. The
work of [10] builds upon the architecture of [5] and extends
it among others with online state estimation and terrain
mapping. With this, the authors report a max. achieved step

Range measurements

Goal pose or
velocity command

Goal pose
generator
Intermediate
goal pose

Every step

Locomotion planner

Elevation
mapping

Footstep Generator

Map
processing

Footstep Optimizer

State
estimator
Robot state

Terrain
map

Nominal foothold

400 Hz

2–5 Hz

10–20 Hz

Surface
normals

Foothold scores

Sensor readings

Signed distance field
Pose
Optimizer

Swing Leg Planner

400 Hz

Motion plan
(Free Gait API)

Free Gait
Core

Desired
robot state

Whole-body
controller
Contact
manager

Actuator
commands

Range measurements

Upon new
command

Robot state

Fig. 2. Based on a goal pose or velocity, the locomotion planning framework generates a new motion plan which is tracked by the whole-body controller.
Sensory information is used to estimate the robot’s pose and to build a map of the surrounding terrain. The terrain map is processed, and valid footholds
are identified. At every step, new foothold locations and swing leg trajectories are planned to account for disturbances and changing environments.

height of 15 cm (20 % leg length) at a speed of 7–13 cm/s.
While our work is similar in structure to [5] and [10],
we contribute a novel robot pose generation based on nonlinear optimization. During locomotion planning, the pose
optimization is coupled with the foothold selection to exploit
the full range of motion of the robot. Additionally, a leg
motion planner ensures safe swing leg motions over and
around obstacles. With this, our robot platform ANYmal
(30 kg, 0.5 m height) [4] reaches obstacles up to 20 cm, which
is an increase of 100 % in comparison to [10] regarding the
different leg lengths. At the same time, we achieve robust
behavior and high success rates (∼90 %) with the help of our
control framework [1] even under disturbances and changing
environments. In our experiments, we have achieved average
velocities of 8–15 cm/s in rough terrain, which is an increase
of 50 % over [10] regarding the different leg lengths. Our
approach is built on our robot-centric elevation mapping
approach with which consistent terrain maps are obtained
solely based on proprioceptive localization, such as legged
odometry with kinematic and inertial sensing. This alleviates
the need for an accurate exteroceptive localization which can
be problematic in environments with insufficient geometrical
or visual features [8, 9]. Furthermore, our approach makes
use of the torque-controllable actuation of ANYmal to apply
the appropriate contact forces on inclined terrain based on
the surface normal information from the terrain map.
In the following, we give an overview of our approach
in Section II. We introduce the map processing steps in
Section III and present the footstep planning and pose and
swing leg motion planning in Section IV. The results for
various experiments are given in Section V and the work is
concluded in Section VI.
II. OVERVIEW OF THE M ETHOD
Our proposed method consists of several modules that are
all interconnected but run in parallel at different update rates.
Fig. 2 shows an overview of the modules and the information
flow. Starting with a desired final goal pose (defined by
a position and a yaw-orientation angle) or desired velocity

command, a next intermediate goal pose is computed. This
is to ensure that the robot does not walk long distances in
a direction in which no range sensor is mounted. The range
sensor continuously measures the distance to the terrain and
is used together with the robot pose estimate to create an
elevation map around the robot at 10–20 Hz depending on
the type of range sensor. This terrain map is shifted along
with the motion of the robot and stores the height information
beneath and around the robot and fuses existing data with
new measurements. At a lower rate of 2–5 Hz, the elevation
map is processed to compute foot score values, surface
normal vectors, and a three-dimensional Signed Distance
Field (SDF). The foot score values reflect the suitability of
an area in the map to place a foot on.
The terrain information is used in the locomotion planner
to find a feasible motion of the robot over the perceived
terrain. The final output of the planner is the target foothold
together with the swing leg motion for the next step. First,
based on the goal pose and the current stance (position
of the legs), a sequence of (planar) footsteps is generated.
These footsteps do not consider the terrain but represent the
nominal gait sequence and step lengths. To find a feasible
footstep, the area around the nominal footstep position is
searched for the closest valid foothold. Since valid footholds
are not necessarily reachable, a pose optimizer is used to
check if a stable robot configuration can be found which
respects stability and kinematic constraints. Once a candidate
foothold is verified by the pose optimizer, the swing trajectory can be planned. Based on the terrain’s SDF, a collisionfree swing trajectory is planned which connects the current
foot position and the optimized foothold target. As the map
is updated continuously and because the robot might not
reach previously planned footholds (due to slip or compliant
ground), this sequence of steps in the locomotion planner is
performed at every footstep to adapt to these changes.
Based on the target foothold and the swing leg motion
plan, the Free Gait Core module synthesizes a whole-body
motion. Internally, it uses the same pose optimizer for the
generation of the base motion as previously in the locomotion

planning process, ensuring that the planned leg motions are
feasible. Given the full motion plan, the whole-body controller executes and stabilizes the robot’s behavior around the
desired trajectories. The controller runs at 400 Hz to generate
the actuator commands from a closed-loop with the state
estimator. It uses the terrain surface normal information from
the map to generate contact forces that respect the boundaries
of the friction cones. Rather than executing the trajectories
regardless of the current state, the controller ensures that
the desired contact situations are reached (contact manager).
Because the motion plans always contain errors, this is a
crucial step in the robust tracking of the motion.
III. M AP P ROCESSING
In our previous work [3], we presented an approach
to create 2.5 D elevation maps from the combination of
pose estimate and a range measurement sensor. In this
representation, each cell of the grid holds a height and a
lower and upper confidence bound. Our approach takes the
uncertainty of the pose estimate and the range measurements
explicitly into account to obtain consistent maps even without
requiring an additional localization system such as GPS or
vision- or laser-based registration. The elevation mapping
framework works with different range sensors such as laser
range sensors, time-of-flight, structured light, and (assisted)
stereo cameras. Given the continuously updated robot-centric
elevation map, the terrain is processed to compute surface
normals, find valid footholds, and build a three-dimensional
signed distance field (SDF) used for planning of collisionfree swing trajectories.

Valid footholds
Invalid footholds

Fig. 3. The elevation map is processed to differentiate regions with valid
(blue) and invalid footholds (red). The foothold classifications is based on
local terrain features such as slope, curvature, roughness, and uncertainty
of the map data.

deviation) from the neighboring cells. We additionally use
the uncertainty interval (the difference between lower and
upper confidence bound) of the cell as a quality measure to
steer the robot away from potentially hazardous regions such
as steps and gaps. This approach enables robust foothold
selection even under the influence of drift from the state
estimation of the robot. To further simplify the foothold
selection process, we create a binary foothold score ŝ based
on a threshold to map s to either 0 or 1. Fig. 3 shows an
elevation map where the color represents the binary foothold
score ŝ for valid and invalid footholds.
C. Signed Distance Field

A. Surface Normal Vectors
We use a standard way to extract the surface normals
from the noisy surface representation based on the Principal
Component Analysis (PCA) [12]. Given the surface points
in a circular region and subtracting their mean position,
the surface normal can be estimated from the Eigen vector
associated to the smallest Eigen value of the subset. As the
nearest neighbors for each cell in the grid can be accessed
directly, the surface normals can be computed efficiently for
the entire map.
B. Foothold Scores
Each cell in the elevation map is associated with a foothold
score s(x, y) ∈ [0, 1]. This value represents the quality of the
foothold, where a cell with s = 1 is a safe foothold, and a
cell with s = 0 might cause the foot to slip. Similarly to other
work [10, 13], we have found that a linear combination of
different quality measures
!
vi (x, y)
,0
(1)
s(x, y) = max 1 − ∑ wi
vcrit
i
provides a simple but reliable foothold score. The variable wi
represents the weight factor for each quality measure i with
value vi (x, y) and max. allowed/critical value vcrit . As quality
measures, we evaluate the slope and curvature (derived from
the surface normals) and the roughness (height standard

Planning collision-free trajectories can be solved with the
help of an SDF map representation. We generate a threedimensional SDF from the elevation map, where each voxel
holds the distance to the nearest surface. The SDF can be
efficiently computed with the approach presented in [14].
IV. M AP -BASED M OTION P LANNING
Based on the current state of the robot, the goal pose,
and the terrain information (Section III), the goal is to find
a feasible sequence of contacts and whole-body motions to
let the robot overcome the rough terrain. Our approach is a
motion planner that, starting from a nominal footstep, finds
the next feasible foothold (one-step planning horizon) with
the help of the combination of the binary foothold score
map and a robot pose optimizer. Once a foothold is verified
to be feasible from both the foothold score map and the pose
optimizer, the swing leg is planned in a second step. Finally,
the desired motion plan is executed while accounting for
errors in sensing and actuation.
A. Footstep Generation
For generating the nominal footsteps, we employ a geometrical approach which is recomputed at each step (Fig. 4):
First, the current stance position and orientation (start pose)
is determined based on the current foot positions. The start
position is given by the geometrical center of the feet and the

Left hind

Left fore

Terrain: valid
Kinematics: valid

Goal pose
Start pose
Current foot
positions

Support polygon
Right hind

Right fore

Default stance
for next step

Feet
midpoint
First step

Nominal foothold

Adjusted foothold

Search region

Terrain: invalid
Kinematics: valid
Terrain: invalid
Kinematics: invalid

Terrain: valid
Kinematics: invalid

Second step

Fig. 4. Illustration of the two first steps of the nominal footstep generation.
At every step, a sequence of default stances is (re-)computed that guide the
robot from the start pose to the goal. The foot position in the default stance
of the subsequent pose is selected as the target for the current swing leg.
This procedure converges to a skew between left and right legs of the robot,
which is important for stability and speed.

Fig. 5.
Starting with the nominal foothold (Section IV-A), candidate
footholds in the search region are checked for their validity. Terrain validity
is indicated by the foothold scores based on the local geometric features
(Section III-B). Kinematic validity is checked with the solution of a pose
optimization (Section IV-C). The nominal foothold is adjusted to the closest
candidate foothold which is valid for both terrain and kinematics.

start orientation is given by the orientation of the connecting
line between the midpoints between hind and forefeet. Based
on the difference between the start and goal pose, the
main direction (longitudinal, lateral, and yaw rotation) is
determined. Given the main direction and the default step
length, the path between the start and goal pose is linearly
sampled with n equal default stances. Here we use a priori
knowledge of a default step length for longitudinal, lateral,
and yaw orientation steps. Each stance is a representation
of how much the robot travels for a full cycle in the main
direction with the default step length. The leg sequence is
determined with the main direction and is given by the
optimality analysis by [15]. For the forward direction, the
leg sequence is right-hind, right-fore, left-hind, left-fore.
The new footstep location is given by the position of the
corresponding foot in the first default stance after the start
pose. If the main direction changes, the leg with the largest
first step is chosen as the new start of the sequence.
This entire procedure is repeated after every step and
provides a suitable default foothold pattern. Apart from being
simple and extremely quick to compute, there are several
important properties of the approach: The algorithm can start
from any configuration of the feet and always ends up in
the default stance at the goal pose. Since the algorithm is
recomputed every step, this method converges to a foothold
pattern with a skew between left and right legs. This skew
is essential for speed and stability and reduces the required
base motion [7]. Finally, this approach is robust against any
deviation from the original plan and allows the robot to recompute the next step towards the goal at each step.

Fig. 5. The positions around the nominal foothold are iterated
through with increasing Euclidian distance from the nominal
foothold. Each position is checked for its validity by checking the binary foothold score for the cells in a patch around
the candidate position. We choose a circular patch with a
diameter of 8 cm, which is slightly larger than the foot size
of ANYmal to account for foot rolling during locomotion. If
all binary foothold scores in the patch are valid, a candidate
foothold is found.
Although the candidate foothold might be a feasible
position based on the terrain, the robot might not be able
to reach it due to kinematic constraints. For this reason,
every candidate foothold is checked for its reachability by
running the pose optimizer with the current and the candidate
foothold as input. If the pose optimizer does not find a
solution, the iteration continuous. Once the search region
is exhausted, the procedure is stopped, and the method
signalizes that no valid footstep could be found.

B. Footstep Optimization
The footstep determined by the nominal footstep generator
is verified for kinematic and terrain feasibility. If the nominal
footstep is not a feasible foothold location, the nearest
neighbor valid foothold location is found as illustrated in

C. Pose Optimization
The pose optimization is a crucial part of our approach to
enable climbing up and down high obstacles. When reaching
for places that are far apart from the previous foot location,
the robot needs to adapt its pose such that the new foothold
can be reached without sacrificing stability or running into
joint position limits. This task can be formulated as an optimization problem as follows: Given N foot locations rFi , the
goal is to find a robot base position rIB and orientation ΦIB
which maximizes reachability and the stability margin under
the constraint of static stability and allowed joint limits. We
encode the reachability in the cost function f (rIB , ΦIB ) by
penalizing the difference between a default foot position r̂Fi
and the foot position resulting from the optimized posed
rFi (rIB , ΦIB ). Additionally, we maximize the static stability
margin by adding a term that penalizes the distance between
the planar projection of the centroid of the Support Polygon

Upper
confidence bound

Swing trajectory

Collisision field c(r)

ε

δ

z

Fig. 6. Our pose optimization formulation efficiently finds the full base
pose (6D position and orientation) for given contact situations.

d1

rF (t0/f )

(SP) r̄SP and the planar projection of the position of the
Center Of Mass (COM) r̄COM (rIB , ΦIB ):
N

minimize

2

f (rIB , ΦIB ) = ∑ r̂Fi − rFi (rIB , ΦIB ) 2

(2)

i=0

2

+ wCOM r̄SP − r̄COM (rIB , ΦIB ) 2
subject to ASP rCOM (rIB , ΦIB ) ≤ bSP
lmin,i ≤ li (rIB , ΦIB ) 2 ≤ lmax,i

(3)
∀i ∈ N .

(4)

We use the support polygon as the area defined by the convex
hull of the support feet positions projected along the direction
of gravity. The robot is statically stable if the projection along
gravity of the COM r̄COM lies with the support polygon. As
the COM position B rCOM is a function of the joint state
vector q, we employ inverse kinematics to find q from
B rFi for each leg i. We encode the static stability in (3)
where ASP and bSP are the linear constraints spanned by the
support polygon. Optionally, we add a support margin which
offsets the support polygon inwards to increase robustness (as
illustrated in Fig. 6). The joint limits are expressed with the
inequality constraint (4) with li the leg length given by the
distance from the hip joint to the foot for leg i. By adjusting
the weighting term wCOM in (2), we can achieve a suitable
trade-off between maximizing the kinematic reachability and
the stability margin (we choose wCOM = 2 for ANYmal).
We can solve this non-linear optimization problem with
Sequential Quadratic Programming (SQP) with an analytical
derivation of the gradients and Hessians of the cost function
(as shown in [16]). Due to the non-linearity of this problem,
the success of finding a solution is dependent on the initial
guess. To this end, we use an initial guess based on a least
square optimization of the kinematic error for leg i
ei (rIB , ΦIB ) = I rIB + ΦIB (B r̂Fi ) − I rFi .

(5)

This error can be minimized by transforming it to an Eigen
value problem when parametrizing the rotation ΦIB as a unit
quaternion [17].
Fig. 6 depicts the solution of the pose optimization formulation for different contact situations. Depending on the
situation, the robot’s base is lowered and pitched to satisfy
the kinematic and stability constraints. With our implementation (quadratic problem solved with the QuadProg++ active
set implementation, hardware details see Section V), the pose

d0

x

d2

Fig. 7. Collision-free swing leg trajectories are planned with help of the 3D
collision fields (here shown in 2D). The collisions field represents the upper
confidence bound of the map, to take the uncertainty of the mapping process
into account. The higher the uncertainty, the higher and ‘more careful’ the
robot will step when approaching and leaving the terrain (red arrow).

optimizer yields a solution to all practical situations within
0.5–2.5 ms with maximal 30 iterations of the SQP.
D. Swing Leg Planning
Given the start and target foothold position, the trajectory
of the swing leg needs to be planned to find the shortest
collision-free trajectory. We reduce this task to the problem
of finding a trajectory of the foot only and limit the collision
checking with the terrain to a sphere (diameter 6 cm) around
the foot. Inspired by the CHOMP trajectory planner [18],
we formulate the planning problem as an optimization. We
parametrize the swing leg trajectories as cubic Hermite
splines and optimize directly over the knot points (except
for the start and target). Herewith, the optimization yields
continuous paths that can be smoothly tracked by the robot.
We stack the 3D knot positions as a vector u and the position
on the spline for time t is given by r(u,t). The optimization
cost function is expressed as a weighted sum of length and
collisions costs, fl (u) and fc (u), respectively:
minimize

f (u) = wl fl (u) + wc fc (u)

tf

Z

= wl

(6)

tf

Z

ṙF (u,t) 2 dt + wc

t=t0

subject to zmin ≤ ui,z ≤ zmax

c(rF (u,t)) ṙF (u,t) 2 dt

t=t0

∀ui ∈ u .

(7)

We constrain the knot points z-coordinate ui,z to lie within
a minimum clearance zmin and maximum height zmax . The
function c(rF ) represents a collision field based on the terrain
map
c(r) = ct (r)ct0 (r)ct f (r) .
(8)
The function ct (r) is a smooth potential function for distance
to an obstacle based on the distance to an obstacle d(r)
acquired from the SDF [18]. Note that we use the upper
confidence bound of the elevation map for the generation
of the SDF as illustrated in Fig. 7, where ε is the allowable
distance threshold. This ensures that the foot does not collide

with the terrain even if the knowledge of the terrain is
coupled with uncertainties. The functions ct0 (r) and ct f (r)
create funnels in the collision function to allow the foot to
create collision-free contact at the start t0 and end t f of the
swing motion. They are expressed as a smooth function based
on the dead zone d0 and the desired funnel angle δ (Fig. 7):



d0, f (rF (t))
1
1 + tanh
,
(9)
ct0, f (rF (t)) =
2
d2
d0, f (rF (t)) = r F (t) − r F (ts ,t f ) 2 − d0 ,
(10)
d1
d2 =
.
(11)
tan δ
We solve the swing motion optimization problem with SQP
and derive the gradients and Hessians numerically. For the
integrals in (6) we use a time resolution of ∆t = 50 ms to
provide a dense resolution for collision checking. As this
optimization might get stuck in a local minimum, we restart
the optimization with an increased number of knots until a
solution is found.
E. Integration with Motion Control
In the presented approach, the generated motion plan
is based on a geometrical representation of the terrain.
However, the ground might be compliant (e.g., sand or grass)
and objects might move or be deformable (e.g., a plastic bag)
in reality. For the successful execution the generated motion
plan, we build upon our Free Gait controller framework [1].
The locomotion planner outputs the desired footsteps as foot
swing trajectory knot points in the elevation map frame. With
this information, the controller can track the motion relative
to the terrain and any slip or error of the robot base control is
compensated for. During execution, the Free Gait controller
uses the presented pose optimization (Section IV-C) with
which it interpolates between robot poses that comply with
desired motion plan. At every step, the controller has to
ensure that the contact between foot and terrain is achieved.
To this end, the controller (contact manager) handles preand post-mature contact switches with a strategy described
in [16].
V. R ESULTS
We have implemented the approach described in this
paper on the quadrupedal robot ANYmal [4]. The robot
weights 30 kg and has a leg length of 0.5 m. ANYmal’s has
three joints per leg which are driven by electrically driven
series elastic actuators (ANYdrive), enabling accurate torque
control. All the presented algorithms run on two onboard
PCs1 which are powered by a battery which allows for a
power autonomy of up to 3 h. As range sensors, we either
use a rotating laser range sensor (Hokuyo UTM-30LX-EW,
update rate 0.5 Hz for a full rotation) or an assisted stereo
camera (Intel RealSense ZR300, update rate at 20 Hz for a
full depth image) which are mounted in the front and back of
the robot. The robot’s underlying motion controller consists
of a virtual model controller for the base and a contact force
1 Intel Core i5 2.3 GHz, 16 Gb for control and planning / Intel Core i7
3.1 GHz, 16 Gb for terrain mapping

TABLE I
S UCCESS RATES FOR STEPPING UP AND DOWN A STEP (10 TRIALS EACH )
Step height

Avg. velocity

w/o map

w/ map

13 % leg length

15 cm/s

100 %
100 %

100 %
100 %

Step up 14 cm
25 % leg length
Step down -14 cm

11 cm/s

70 %
90 %

100 %
100 %

Step up 21 cm
38 % leg length
Step down -21 cm

8 cm/s

0%
80 %

90 %
80 %

Step up 7 cm
Step down 7 cm

distribution optimization [16]. A video2 showing the results
is accompanied to this paper.
A. Step Up and Down
We have commanded ANYmal to walk over a flat step at
various heights, which includes a step up and a step down
maneuver. For comparison, we have conducted the experiments for the pure reactive walking without exteroceptive
perception (without map) and with active range sensing (with
map). At each trial, the robot started each from different
positions. For the experiments without mapping, we have
globally adjusted the step height to match the obstacle. The
success rate out of ten trials for each type of combination
is summarized in Table I. The average velocity is measured
as the total covered horizontal distance divided the duration
that the robot takes to clear the obstacle.
For a step height of 7 cm (13 % of leg length), both
approaches never failed during our trails. For the step with
14 cm (25 % of leg length), stepping up without perception
led to some failure cases, where the footstep would be
placed to close to the step and experienced a collision during
the following step. This was successfully prevented with
active perception. For the 21 cm step (38 % of leg length),
stepping up without perception was not possible, due to
the fact that reaching this height without tilting the pose
cannot be achieved. However, stepping down was still mostly
successful due to the step recovery approach of the motion
controller [16]. Stepping up to 21 cm was again significantly
improved with active perception. Fig. 8 shows snapshots of
one trial on the step with 21 cm height with active mapping.
One can observe how the base is tilted to facilitate stepping
up (Fig. 8a, b). At later stages (Fig. 8c–e), the leg length
constraint in the pose optimizer prevents over-extension of
the legs.
B. Inclined Surfaces
With the help of the torque-control capability of ANYmal,
we make use of the knowledge of the surface normals from
the elevation map (Section III-A). The controller takes the
tilted friction cones in the force distribution as constraints
into account. This extends ANYmal capability to overcome
difficult terrain with inclined surfaces. Fig. 9 shows an image
from an experiment on a concave and a convex structure.
In this situation, the contact forces are regulated such that
2 Available at https://youtu.be/CpzQu25iLa0

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

21 cm

Fig. 8. The locomotion planner is used to climbing over a step of 21 cm with active terrain mapping with the frontal laser range sensor. The planning
framework finds a sequence of safe footholds, base poses, and swing trajectories that guide the robot over the obstacle with an average velocity of 8 cm/s.

the execution of approaching a goal, requiring the robot to
adapt and replan the motion. For the experiment shown in
Fig. 11a, we have moved the whiteboard ∼1 m while the
robot was walking over it. In this case, the robot localized
with respect to the environment with Iterative Closest Point
(ICP) [19] such that the navigation goal could be tracked in a
global frame. While moving the board, the robot successfully
kept balance, updated the terrain map, and replanned the
footsteps such that it could reach the goal. Other experiments
further demonstrate the robustness of the framework such as
walking over a thin ledge and climbing over a seesaw and a
human (Fig. 11b–d).
Fig. 9. Surface normals are computed from the terrain map to enhance
the controller performance on inclined surfaces. Based on the orientation
of the friction cones, the contact forces are regulated to respect the friction
constraints preventing the feet from slipping.

they push ‘inwards’ or ‘outwards’ to prevent slippage. In our
experiments, walking over the same obstacles without taking
the surface normals into account was not possible.
C. Changing Environment
Demonstrating the reactivity of our approach, we expose
ANYmal to a quickly changing environment. As depicted in
Fig. 10, we have commanded forward velocity while placing
cinder blocks in front of the robot. The continuous map
updates and step re-planning allowed successful planning of
the footholds and trajectories around the obstacles.
D. Stairs
Stairs can be seen as a concatenation of multiple steps
in both upward and downward direction. However, they are
significantly more demanding because the front and hind legs
are often multiple steps apart which makes it difficult to
find a motion that fulfills the kinematic, stability, and joint
torque limitations. We have evaluated our approach on a
standardized set of stairs with a rise of 17 cm and a run of
29 cm as shown in Fig. 1. The system has no prior knowledge
about the shape of the stairs and the planning framework
deals with it like with any other obstacle. ANYmal was able
to climb the stairs upwards and downwards multiple times.
However, climbing the stairs up turned out to be more robust
than climbing down because of the limited view on the lower
stairs when heading downwards.
E. Robustness and Versatility
We have conducted several experiments to illustrate the robustness of our approach. In multiple trials we have disturbed

VI. C ONCLUSIONS
We presented a motion planning method for the perceptive rough-terrain locomotion with a quadrupedal robot. All
sensing and computation run onboard the robot in real-time
without any prior knowledge of the terrain. Based on the
acquired elevation map, the framework finds a sequence of
suitable footholds and generates base and swing leg trajectories that guide the motion of the robot over the obstacles.
A core element of the framework is the proposed pose
optimization which efficiently finds full robot poses for given
foot placements. The planner is tightly coupled with the
terrain mapping, robot controller, and localization, allowing it
to continuously re-plan the motion while robustly accommodating disturbances and changes in the environment. We have
evaluated the effectiveness of our approach in experiments
including climbing over steps, inclined surfaces, stairs, and
various disturbance tests with changing environments.
In this work, the primary assumption for foothold planning
is that we can find a feasible motion by planning the
next step while executing the previously planned step. This
approach is limited by the greedy behavior of the onestep planning horizon. However, we have found that this
approach works reliably for the tested terrains described in
Section V including stairs. A similar experience was reported
by [5, 20], where multi-step look-aheads were only necessary
for obstacles larger than ∼50% of the leg length. Another
assumption is that we can apply a sequential approach in
which the swing leg trajectory is planned after the foothold
selection similar to other works [7, 10]. Thereby, it is not
guaranteed that the swing leg planner can find a feasible
solution. However, we have found that with the help of the
base motion towards to next stance during the swing motion
and the large range of motion of our hardware, this is almost
never an issue. We also reduce the collision checking to the

Fig. 10. As the robot is commanded to walk forward, obstacles are placed in front of it. The mapping framework continuously updates the map which
allows the locomotion planner to adapt to the changing terrain.
(a)

Disturbance

Goal
(b)

(c)

(d)

Fig. 11. (a) The robot replans the motion to adapt to the disturbance
which has been introduced by relocating the board during execution. In this
demonstration, the robot localizes itself with the rotating laser range sensor
and can robustly track and reach the desired goal location. (b)–(d) Various
experiments demonstrating the versatility and robustness of our approach.

geometry of the foot, and we neglect other parts of the leg.
This simplification still yields satisfactory results in practice,
as the unique form of ANYmal’s shank avoids most of the
shin collisions as can be observed for example in Fig. 8d.
In future work, we are focussing on extending the maximal
obstacle height to over 50 % of the leg length by extending
our motion planner with a multi-step planning horizon.
Furthermore, an increase of the locomotion speed is targeted
by employing fully dynamic gaits such as a trot.
R EFERENCES
[1] P. Fankhauser, C. D. Bellicoso, C. Gehring, R. Dubé, A. Gawel, and
M. Hutter, “Free Gait – An Architecture for the Versatile Control of
Legged Robots,” in IEEE-RAS International Conference on Humanoid
Robots, 2016.
[2] M. Bloesch, C. Gehring, P. Fankhauser, M. Hutter, M. A. Hoepflinger,
and R. Siegwart, “State Estimation for Legged Robots on Unstable and
Slippery Terrain,” in IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent
Robots and Systems (IROS), pp. 6058–6064, 2013.
[3] P. Fankhauser, M. Bloesch, C. Gehring, M. Hutter, and R. Siegwart,
“Robot-Centric Elevation Mapping with Uncertainty Estimates,” in
International Conference on Climbing and Walking Robots (CLAWAR),
2014.
[4] M. Hutter, C. Gehring, D. Jud, A. Lauber, C. D. Bellicoso, V. Tsounis,
J. Hwangbo, K. Bodie, P. Fankhauser, M. Bloesch, R. Diethelm,

S. Bachmann, A. Melzer, and M. Hoepflinger, “ANYmal - a Highly
Mobile and Dynamic Quadrupedal Robot,” in IEEE/RSJ International
Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), 2016.
[5] M. Kalakrishnan, J. Buchli, P. Pastor, M. Mistry, and S. Schaal,
“Learning, planning, and control for quadruped locomotion over
challenging terrain,” The International Journal of Robotics Research,
vol. 30, pp. 236–258, nov 2010.
[6] M. Zucker, N. Ratliff, M. Stolle, J. Chestnutt, J. A. Bagnell, C. G.
Atkeson, and J. Kuffner, “Optimization and learning for rough terrain
legged locomotion,” The International Journal of Robotics Research,
vol. 30, pp. 175–191, jan 2011.
[7] P. D. Neuhaus, J. E. Pratt, and M. J. Johnson, “Comprehensive summary of the Institute for Human and Machine Cognition’s experience
with LittleDog,” The International Journal of Robotics Research,
vol. 30, pp. 216–235, jan 2011.
[8] D. Belter, P. Łabȩcki, and P. Skrzypczyński, “Adaptive Motion Planning for Autonomous Rough Terrain Traversal with a Walking Robot,”
Journal of Field Robotics, vol. 33, pp. 337–370, may 2016.
[9] I. Havoutis, J. Ortiz, S. Bazeille, V. Barasuol, C. Semini, and D. G.
Caldwell, “Onboard Perception-Based Trotting and Crawling with
the Hydraulic Quadruped Robot (HyQ),” in IEEE/RSJ International
Conference on Intelligent Robot and Systems (IROS), 2013.
[10] A. W. Winkler, C. Mastalli, M. Focchi, D. G. Caldwell, and
I. Havoutis, “Planning and Execution of Dynamic Whole-Body Locomotion for a Hydraulic Quadruped on Challenging Terrain,” in IEEE
International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), 2015.
[11] C. Mastalli, M. Focchi, I. Havoutis, A. Radulescu, S. Calinon,
J. Buchli, D. G. Caldwell, and C. Semini, “Trajectory and Foothold
Optimization using Low-Dimensional Models for Rough Terrain
Locomotion,” in IEEE International Conference on Robotics and
Automation (ICRA), pp. 1096–1103, 2017.
[12] K. Klasing, D. Althoff, D. Wollherr, and M. Buss, “Comparison of
surface normal estimation methods for range sensing applications,”
IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA),
pp. 3206–3211, may 2009.
[13] J. Z. Kolter, M. P. Rodgers, and A. Y. Ng, “A control architecture
for quadruped locomotion over rough terrain,” IEEE International
Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), may 2008.
[14] P. F. Felzenszwalb and D. P. Huttenlocher, “Distance Transforms of
Sampled Functions,” Theory of Computing, vol. 8, no. 1, 2012.
[15] R. B. McGhee and A. Frank, “On the stability properties of quadruped
creeping gaits,” Mathematical Biosciences, vol. 351, 1968.
[16] P. Fankhauser, Perceptive Locomotion for Legged Robots in Rough
Terrain. Doctoral thesis, ETH Zurich, 2018.
[17] M. Bloesch and M. Hutter, “Technical Implementations of the Sense
of Balance,” in Humanoid Robotics: A Reference (P. Vadakkepat and
A. Goswami, eds.), Springer Netherlands, 2017.
[18] M. Zucker, N. Ratliff, a. D. Dragan, M. Pivtoraiko, M. Klingensmith,
C. M. Dellin, J. a. Bagnell, and S. S. Srinivasa, “CHOMP: Covariant
Hamiltonian optimization for motion planning,” The International
Journal of Robotics Research, vol. 32, no. 9-10, pp. 1164–1193, 2013.
[19] F. Pomerleau, F. Colas, R. Siegwart, and S. Magnenat, “Comparing
ICP variants on real-world data sets,” Autonomous Robots, vol. 34,
no. 3, pp. 133–148, 2013.
[20] B. Mitchell, A. G. Hofmann, and B. C. Williams, “Search-based
Foot Placement for Quadrupedal Traversal of Challenging Terrain,” in
IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA),
pp. 1461–1466, apr 2007.

