ETH Library

Quadrupedal locomotion on
uneven terrain with sensorized feet
Journal Article
Author(s):
Valsecchi, Giorgio; Grandia, Ruben; Hutter, Marco
Publication date:
2020-04
Permanent link:
https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.3929/ethz-b-000392778
Rights / license:
In Copyright - Non-Commercial Use Permitted
Originally published in:
IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters 5(2), https://doi.org/10.1109/LRA.2020.2969160
Funding acknowledgement:
- subTerranean Haptic INvestiGator ()

This page was generated automatically upon download from the ETH Zurich Research Collection.
For more information, please consult the Terms of use.

IEEE ROBOTICS AND AUTOMATION LETTERS. PREPRINT VERSION. ACCEPTED JANUARY, 2020

1

Quadrupedal locomotion on uneven terrain with sensorized feet
Giorgio Valsecchi1 , Ruben Grandia1 , Marco Hutter1

Abstract—Sensing of the terrain shape is crucial for legged
robots deployed in the real world since the knowledge of the local
terrain inclination at the contact points allows for an optimized
force distribution that minimizes the risk of slipping. In this
paper, we present a reactive locomotion strategy for torque
controllable quadruped robots based on sensorized feet. Since
the present approach works without exteroceptive sensing, it is
robust against degraded vision. Inertial and force/torque sensors
implemented in specially designed feet with articulated passive
ankle joints measure the local terrain inclination and interaction
forces. The proposed controller exploits the contact null-space in
order to minimize the tangential forces to prevent slippage even
in case of extreme contact conditions. We experimentally tested
the proposed method in laboratory experiments and validated
the approach with the quadrupedal robot ANYmal.
Index Terms—Mechanism Design; Legged Robots; Motion
Control

I. I NTRODUCTION

L

EGGED robots have superior potential to overcome
rough terrain compared to wheeled or tracked systems
as they can discretely select individual footholds. However,
maintaining stable footholds and avoiding slippage are still
major challenges, as they imply a good knowledge of the local
interaction between the foot and the environment. In particular,
in order to avoid slippage, the ground reaction forces at all
contact points must remain within the friction cone. It is,
therefore, necessary to estimate the local orientation of the
ground in order to shape the ground reaction force distribution
appropriately.
Additionally, depending on the number of feet in contact,
the amount of contact forces exceeds the number of floating
base degrees of freedom to be controlled. This means that there
is a null-space available that makes it possible to optimize for
secondary objectives for the contact forces, such as minimizing
torques, minimizing forces, or as done in this work, minimize
the risk of slipping.
Minimizing the risk of slipping is achieved by aligning
ground reaction forces with local surface normal directions.
This can be achieved by reactive strategies which rely on
proprioception and approximations of the terrain or by proactive strategies which require knowledge of the environment
[1], available a priori or acquired with adequate sensors.
Manuscript received September, 10, 2019; Revised December, 12, 2019;
Accepted January, 12, 2020.
This paper was recommended for publication by Editor Paolo Rocco upon
evaluation of the Associate Editor and Reviewers’ comments. This work
has been supported by the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and
innovation program under grant agreement No 780883. This work has been
conducted as part of ANYmal Research, a community to advance legged
robotics.
1 All the authors are with the Robotic Systems Laboratory,
ETH Zurich, Zurich 8092, Switzerland vgiorgio@ethz.ch

rgrandia@ethz.ch mahutter@ethz.ch
Digital Object Identifier (DOI): see top of this page.

Simple reactive approaches can only redistribute the ground
reaction force among the existing contacts, according to their
knowledge of the ground shape, while proactive approaches
have the option of planning the footholds to exploit the features
of the terrain better. However, in real-world situations, the
sensing capabilities of the robot might be impaired, and it
is not always possible to build an adequate 3D model of the
terrain. A multitude of reasons can impose such limitations:
partially flooded terrains, environments with dust, fog, and
smoke, vegetation occluding the field of view, mud, failing
vision sensors. Similar conditions can be found in underground
tunnels, mines, collapsed or burning buildings, forests, scenarios where is highly desirable to deploy robots. Moreover, even
if it is possible to know the terrain geometry before stepping,
the ground might shift, or small measurement inaccuracies can
cause the real foothold to be different from the planned.
This work focuses on improving robot locomotion in the
scenarios mentioned above. The approach has been implemented utilizing specially designed passive adaptive sensorized feet and a hierarchical whole-body control algorithm
that optimizes the contact force distribution on the legged
robotic platform ANYmal. The additional information provided by the feet allows the reactive strategy to achieve a
better distribution of the ground reaction forces.
A. Related work
Sensorized feet have been developed before in robotics,
serving different purposes in quadrupeds and bipeds. Most
biped robots use feet with actuated dorsiflexion/plantarflexion
and inversion/eversion (necessary for static stability) as the
Honda ASIMO robot [2], Lola [3], KHR-3 [4] and WALKMAN [5] equipped with 6-axes force/torque transducers.
Quadruped robots on the other hand typically have ball-shaped
feet without sensors [6] [7] [8] [9], while extended and adaptive feet with articulated ankles are less common [10] [11].
Sensorized feet for quadruped have also been experimented,
based on different sensing principles, such as strain gauge
force sensor [12], sensitive skin [13] [14] [15], optical force
sensors [16] and vibrissae [17].
For quadruped robots, the terrain shape sensing, necessary
to minimize the risk of slipping, has been addressed both with
reactive and proactive strategies. [18], [19] and [20] assumed
complete knowledge of the environment to have quadruped
robots walking over constant slopes or steep grooves. Surface
normal estimation by fitting planes over contact points has
been used in [21], [22] and [8]. [16] used additional sensor
located in the foot to estimate local normal vectors. [23] and
[24] used external motion capture and high-resolution scans
of the terrain. Online exteroceptive range sensor are used in
[25]. [26] proposed a more extended approach, which mixes

2

IEEE ROBOTICS AND AUTOMATION LETTERS. PREPRINT VERSION. ACCEPTED JANUARY, 2020

reactive and proactive strategies while taking into account the
degradation of visual feedback.
B. Contribution
We present a novel sensorized foot characterized by an
articulated passive ankle with 2 degrees of freedom, sixaxis force/torque sensors and IMUs, integrated into a robust
modular unit interfaceable with ANYmal. We propose an
algorithm for estimating the foot pose using the data from
the integrated IMUs. We present an integration of the tactile
feedback in the hierarchical whole-body control approach from
[27], with the capability of optimizing the ground reaction
force. The utilization of the sensed local surface normals is
two-fold: 1) the friction cone is aligned with the local surface
to put a hard constraint on the contact force direction, and
2) the risk of slippage is minimized in the null-space of
the motion control tasks. We tested the improved sensing
capabilities of ANYmal. We performed the validation of the
proposed controller through experiments on selected terrains.
Field tests have been conducted to establish the effect on the
locomotion of the proposed approach.
II. M ETHOD
A. sensorized foot

(a) Side view

(b) Bottom view

Fig. 1: Side and bottom views of the newly developed foot.

Fig. 2: Sub-assemblies of the foot
We designed sensor-equipped, adaptive feet to enhance
locomotion on rough and slippery terrains while measuring
local ground inclination and superficial properties. Similarly

to ANYmal, the feet have to be sufficiently robust to operate
continuously in a challenging environment while while bearing
a load of 200 N (determined from data acquired on the ANYmal). The design consists of a large flat contact surface that
can comply to the local ground inclination without interfering
with the kinematics of the leg.
We considered a possible inclination of the terrain of up
to 25°. The range of motion (ROM) for ground compliance
is set to 50° for the pitch- and 30° for the roll axis. Since
each leg only allows for hip abduction/adduction, hip flexion/extension, and knee flexion/extension, the foot compliance
around yaw prevents slipping while turning. With a weight of
314 g (including cabling and connectors), it is lighter than the
original point foot. Fig.2 illustrates the sub-assemblies of the
foot, which the following paragraphs describe in details.
1) Foot sole: The sole has a surface area of 60 cm2 (100 mm
x 60 mm) and is made from an off-road rubber tire featuring
5 mm studs for increased traction (Fig.1b). The sole is connected to a metal rim by clamping, which avoids peeling and
gluing issues. A damping foam placed between the rubber sole
and the metal structure reduces the peak loads resulting from
impact forces during walking. An acetal slider avoids the foot
getting stuck on overhanging edges and retains the metal rim.
2) Pivot joint: The pivot joint features a lightweight, universal joint with integrated end stops to provide the required
ground compliance. An Ester Polyurethane rubber tube of
Shore A70 surrounds the universal joint, providing the retaining force to reset the foot to its initial position after a
deflection.
3) Force sensor: A custom, in-house developed 6-axis
force/torque sensor1 is placed above the pivot joint to measure
the forces acting on the foot. It consists of a force sensing
element with strain gauges. The sensor is lightweight and
robust and allows sensing up to 1000 N along the z-axis and
400 N along the x and y-axis. The maximum torque the sensor
can sense is as 10 Nm. The accuracy lies within 1.5% of the
measured value, while the repeatability lies below 0.05%. The
sensor is temperature compensated to minimize drift during
operation.
4) Custom electronics: The electronics of the foot consists of
two IMUs (MPU-9250), a force sensor and a microcontroller
board. One IMU is located in the sole, while the PCB in
the shank includes the second. Serial peripheral interface
bus (SPI) connects both the IMUs and the force sensor to
the microcontroller. The IMUs are read out at 1 kHz, while
force measurements have an update frequency of 400 Hz. The
microcontroller board is connected to the robot via EtherCAT
and powered through the auxiliary 12 V power line. The
custom 6-axis force/torque features a PCB with analog-todigital converters (ADCs) and a microcontroller that processes
the analog signals of the strain gauges. The high-level side
records sensor data at 400 Hz.
5) Shank: The carbon fiber shank connects the foot to the
knee of the robot. The shank is sealed and features a conical
slider for protection of the force sensor.
1 https://www.botasystems.com/

VALSECCHI et al.: QUADRUPEDAL LOCOMOTION ON UNEVEN TERRAIN WITH SENSORIZED FEET

6) Sealing: The joint is protected by thick bellows (visible
in Fig.1a), mechanically clamped to the structure and sealed,
which improves the ingress protection rating compared to
previous work. O-rings and silicone seal all the matching
surfaces. Water-proof cable glands and connector protect the
cables.

3

estimate of the foot orientation is used to rotate the measured
acceleration F â, to the estimated world frame W 0 â. The
rotational difference between this measured acceleration and
the gravity vector [0, 0, 1]T is given by the quaternion ∆qacc .
The correction quaternion is computed as a spherical linear
interpolation (SLERP) between ∆qacc and qI = [1, 0, 0, 0]T
with interpolation coefficient αa

B. Foot pose estimation

∆qcorr = SLERP(qI , ∆qacc ; αa )

The joint angles of the pivot joint shown in Fig. 2 are not
directly measured. To estimate the orientation of the foot,
measurements of the IMU in the foot sole are fused with
ANYmal’s state estimation [28]. The state estimation of the
robot base relies on points that are stationary w.r.t. the world
frame. This would normally be the contact location of a pointfoot, but in our case to rotational center of the ankle joint is
used. This makes the estimated state of the rest of the robot
independent of the estimated foot pose.
The relevant reference frames for the foot pose estimation
algorithm are shown in Fig. 3. The body-fixed shank frame S,
ankle frame A, and foot frame F are separated by consecutive
rotations around the y-axis and x-axis. The world frame W is
the world frame estimated by ANYmal’s state estimation, and
the frame W 0 has a relative rotation around the z-axis. The
goal of the foot pose estimation algorithm shown in Fig. 4
is to estimate the foot pose in the world frame parameterized
by the unit quaternion qW F from IMU angular velocity and
acceleration measurements {F ω̂ W 0 F , F â} and the estimated
shank orientation qSW .

(2)

Due to the fundamentally different nature of the swing
and contact phase, we use two sets of parameters, shown in
Table I. During the stance phase, the gyro bias is estimated,
and the estimation relies mostly on acceleration measurements.
During the swing phase, the acceleration measurements are
less informative due to the motion of the feet, and the filter
relies more on the integration of angular velocity.

Fig. 4: Foot pose estimation block diagram consisting of a
standard complementary filter and a drift compensation using
the robot state and ankle kinematics.
2) Drift correction: The drift of the foot orientation qF W 0
with respect to the world frame used by the robot is expressed
as
qF W = qF W 0 ⊗ ∆qW 0 W ,
(3)
where ∆qW 0 W is a pure rotation around the z-axis.
The kinematics of the ankle defined as
qF W = qF A ⊗ qAS ⊗ qSW ,

(4)

are used to correct for the drift.
Equating both expressions provides the constraint

Fig. 3: The reference frames used in the foot pose estimation.
The shank frame S, ankle A, and foot frame F are attached
to the corresponding bodies. The frames W and W 0 are world
frames with a relative yaw angle in between.
1) Complementary filter: A complementary filter is used
to estimate the roll and pitch of the foot in the world frame
W 0 . First, the gyro bias is estimated by lowpass filtering the
angular velocity measurements when the foot is in contact,
k+1
= (1 − αb )F bkω + αbF ω̂ W 0 F .
F bω

(1)

Afterwards, the bias corrected angular velocity measurements
are used to forward integrate the orientation estimate.
Acceleration measurements are used if the magnitude is
close to 1 g, i.e. |kF âk − 1| ≤ βa . The forward propagated

qF A ⊗ qAS ⊗ qSW = qF W 0 ⊗ ∆qW 0 W

(5)

qx (φ) ⊗ qy (θ) ⊗ qSW = qF W 0 ⊗ qz (ψ),

(6)

where φ, θ, and ψ parameterize the pure roll, pitch, and
yaw rotations. For non-singular orientations, the constraint
consists of three independent equations and three unknowns.
Solving the constraint symbolically results in two solutions
{φ, θ, ψ}, neglecting additional full rotations. Typically, only
one solution has ankle pitch and roll angles that are within
kinematic limits. The corresponding yaw angle is then used
to correct for the drift between the two world frames. When
two solutions are within the kinematic limits, the drift is not
corrected.
C. Controller
We use the motion optimization described in [29] to obtain
desired torso and feet accelerations based on user commanded

4

IEEE ROBOTICS AND AUTOMATION LETTERS. PREPRINT VERSION. ACCEPTED JANUARY, 2020

TABLE I: Foot pose estimation parameters in stance and swing
phase.
Parameters
Angular velocity bias gain
Acceleration correction SLERP coefficient
Acceleration measurement threshold

Symbol
αb
αa
βa

Stance
0.001
0.02
0.1

Swing
0.0
0.005
0.1

TABLE II: Prioritized tasks used in the hierarchical wholebody controller together with the task’s dimensionality and
type (equality/inequality).
Priority
0

1

2

Task
Floating base equations of motion.
Torque limits.
Friction cone constraint.
No motion at the contact points.
Center of mass linear motion tracking.
Base angular motion tracking.
Swing leg position tracking.
Contact force optimization.

Dim.
6
12
5nc
3nc
3
3
12 − 3nc
3nc

Type
Eq.
Ineq.
Ineq.
Eq.
Eq.
Eq.
Eq.
Eq.

torso velocities and a desired gait pattern. Estimation of the
contact state is described in [30], along with reactive measures
when the desired and measured state differ. In short, a probabilistic algorithm fuses dynamic and kinematic information to
classify a foot to be in contact, swing, or slip. When a leg is
classified to be in swing, but a contact was desired, a vertical
motion is initiated to establish contact. In case of a slip event,
joint impedance gains are increased to stabilize the leg.
In this work, we adapt the tracking controller to exploit
the information about local ground inclination. We use the
hierarchical whole-body control approach described in [27],
which optimizes over generalized accelerations u̇ ∈ Rnu and
λ ∈ R3nc , where nu is the number of generalized velocities,
and nc is the number of contact points. Because of the low
joint stiffness and small footprint of the foot compared to
the full support polygon, each foot is modelled as a single
contact point located at the center of rotation of the ankle joint.
The list of prioritized tasks is given in Table II together with
the amount and type of constraints they impose. The number
of independent dimensions left after applying the physical
constraints at priority 0, and motion tracking constraints at
priority 1, has been extensively studied in [31].
Internal forces, which do not influence the robot’s net
acceleration, can be realized between contact points when the
system is an overconstrained situation. While [31] outlines
the mathematical details, we provide an intuitive explanation
in the following paragraph.
In full stance phase, twelve independent contact force
directions exist (3 contact constraints per leg), with only six
un-actuated base coordinates to control. There are, therefore,
six dimensions left to optimize during the contact optimization
in priority 2. With three, and two contact points, the remaining
dimensionality reduces to three and one respectively. For a
single and no contact points, there are no internal forces that
can be created.
The reference controller, referred to as standard controller,
estimates a single terrain normal by fitting a plane through
all available contact points. This estimated plane provides the
surface normal for the friction cone constraint.

For the Terrain aware controller presented in this work, the
friction cone constraint and contact force optimization tasks
are adapted to incorporate the information about local ground
inclination. For the other tasks, we refer the reader to [27].
From each estimated foot orientation, a surface normal, W ni ,
and a tangential basis W Ti are extracted. The tangential basis,
Ti = [ti,h , ti,l ], contains two unit vectors, where W ti,h is
aligned with the heading of the torso. The contact forces
corresponding to the i-th foot are denoted by W λi . In the
following sections, the subscript indicating the world frame is
dropped to simplify the notation.
1) Friction cone constraint: The friction cone constraint is
implemented as a friction pyramid, for each foot
(±ti,h − µ ni )T λi ≤ 0,
T

(±ti,l − µ ni ) λi ≤ 0,
−nTi λi ≤ −λmin ,

(7)
(8)
(9)

where µ is the friction coefficient, and λmin is a minimal
contact force to avoid loss of contact. These parameters are
set to 0.5 and 5 N respectively and remain fixed for all
experiments. Note that due to the approximation of the cone
as a√ pyramid, a ratio of tangential and normal forces up to
0.5 2 is possible.
2) Contact force optimization: On flat ground, the lowest
priority task is typically used to either minimize torques or
internal forces. Minimizing internal forces can be achieved by
a contact force optimization task that minimizes the magnitude
of the contact forces kλi k22 . On inclined surfaces, however,
it becomes desirable to create internal forces such that the
resulting contact forces are aligned with the local surface
normal. To that end, we formulate the following optimization,
nc
X
min
kTTi λi k22 + γ 2 (nTi λi )2 ,
(10)
λ i=1
where γ is a regularization parameter. Note that γ = 1.0
retrieves the task that minimizes contact forces. Choosing
γ = 0.0 leads to undesirable effects when the normal vectors
of all feet are close to parallel in full stance configuration. In
that case, the optimization problem in the last task becomes
highly sensitive to small deviations in the surface normals,
resulting in an unequal force distribution between the feet
and an increased sensitivity to noise. Take the example of
the robot standing on four feet on flat ground with vertical
surface normal. If one foot has a minimal tilt angle, the optimal
solution is to completely unload this leg while standing on
the other three. Penalizing the force magnitude in normal
direction regularizes these cases by promoting an equal force
distribution between the legs.
To fit the hierarchical whole-body control framework, the
minimization in (10) is transcribed into an equality task,

 T   
Ti
u̇
03nc ×nu blockdiagonal
= 0.
(11)
λ
γnTi
III. R ESULTS AND DISCUSSION
A. Test setup
ANYmal, a dog-sized quadrupedal robot, has been used as
testing platform because it provides the torque controllability

VALSECCHI et al.: QUADRUPEDAL LOCOMOTION ON UNEVEN TERRAIN WITH SENSORIZED FEET

(a) Blocks

(b) Adjustable V-shaped
terrain

(c) Concrete sewer tube

(d) Large round stones

5

by green arrows. The plane interpolated on the contact points
is represented as a shaded rectangle and its estimated normal,
named ñ, is represented by the bright red small arrow. To
better measure the difference between the actual terrain normal
and those measured, the error angle αe is introduced, defined
as the angle between the estimated normal and the actual one.
The feet contact forces are named Fi , which in the analysis
are decomposed in components perpendicular and tangential
to the contact surface, respectively Fi⊥ and Fik . In Fig. 6.
Red arrows represent the contact forces commanded by the
controller, while blue arrows represent the forces measured
by the sensorized feet.
B. Sensorized foot sensing capabilities

Fig. 5: Terrains used for testing.

Fitting
plane
Sensorized
foot

20
10
0
1

2

3

4

Fig. 7: Maximum error angles over different terrains. Terrains
considered:block in pitch and roll directions (1 and 2), Vshaped terrain in pitch and roll direction (3 and 4).

Fitting
plane
Sensorized
foot

α [°]

60
40
20
0
0

10

20

30

40

Time [s]

Fig. 8: Surface angles measured by fitting plane and sensorized
foot during changing pitch experiment.

30

α [°]

[7] required by the controller presented in II-C. We validated
the proposed system with a bottom-up approach: first, the
sensing capabilities of the feet have been confirmed (III-B),
then the performances of the terrain aware controller have been
measured (III-C), and finally the effects on locomotion were
evaluated (III-D). All the test were performed with a human
operator giving velocity commands to the robot.
Terrains and obstacles with pronounced differences between
local and average inclination have been selected to highlight
the sensing capabilities of the sensorized feet and the tangential force minimization of the controller. We evaluated
the impact on locomotion performance with outdoor tests on
terrains where slippage would occur easily in case of poor
contact forces distribution. The complete selection of terrains
consists in:
• blocks with a height of 15 cm placed under the left feet,
Fig.5a;
• inclined wood planks, with adjustable slope, assembled
in V shape, Fig.5b;
• round concrete sewer tube, Fig.5c;
• round large stones fixed to the ground, Fig.5d.

αe [°]

30

20
10
16

18

20

18

20

α [°]

20
15

Left feet
Right feet
Fitting
plane
Ground
truth

10
5
16

Time [s]

(a) Standard controller

(b) Terrain aware controller

Fig. 6: 3D visualization of ANYmal. Surface normals are
represented in green, desired contact forces in red, measured
contact forces in blue and interpolated surface normal in bright
red.
Fig.6 consists of two visualizations of ANYmal, with representations of the vectors used in the following analysis. Surface normals measured by the sensorized feet, are represented

Fig. 9: Surface inclinations measured by sensorized feet and
fitting plane while walking over V shaped terrain. Front feet
in top graph, hind feet in bottom graph.
Fig.6 shows two visualizations of ANYmal standing over
a V-shaped terrain, the qualitative difference between ni and
ñ is visible in the representation. The graph in Fig. 7 gives
a quantitative representation of the difference. The maximum
error angles produced by the fitting plane and by the sensorized
feet are shown, respectively in blue and red. The terrains
considered for this test consist of the blocks in pitch and

IEEE ROBOTICS AND AUTOMATION LETTERS. PREPRINT VERSION. ACCEPTED JANUARY, 2020

sensitivity to noise in the normal estimate, as discussed in
Section II-C.
Standard
controller
Terrain
aware
controller

0.6

|Fk |
|F⊥ |

roll configuration (1 and 2 in the graph) and V terrain with
30°slope in roll and pitch (3 and 4). The difference is greater
for terrain characterized by large local inclinations and where
the feet are all at the same height. In such cases, the error
angle for ñ almost coincide with the local inclination, while
the sensorized foot can produce errors significantly smaller.
The graph in Fig. 8 shows the surface inclination measured
by the fitting plane and the sensorized foot during a quasi-static
experiment, where we progressively increased the inclination
of one of the side of the V terrain until slippage occurred.
The sensorized foot is more sensitive to the changing inclination, while the fitting plane is only marginally affected. We
performed the experiment using the terrain aware controller.
Such angle would be otherwise infeasible with the standard
controller as shown in III-C
The graph in Fig. 9 shows the performance of the sensorized
foot while trotting on the V terrain. The upper graph represents
the front feet, while the bottom represents the hind ones. The
absolute surface inclination is calculated using the normals
from the complementary filter described in II-B. The ground
truth inclinations, measured separately, are also plotted in the
graph. According to the data, the normal estimation from
the sensorized foot outperforms the fitting plane also while
walking. A higher level of noise in the feet data is present,
which can be attributed to impacts of the other feet during
locomotion.

0.4
0.2
0
1

2

3

4

Fig. 11: Average tangential to perpendicular force ratio for the
two control strategies. Terrains used: V-shaped terrain in pitch
and roll direction (1 and 2), sewer tube (3) and large stones
(4)

1
0.8

|Fk |
|F⊥ |

6

0.6
0.4
0.2
0
30

40

50

60

70

Surface inclination [°]

Fig. 12: Tangential to normal force ratio for for variable pitch
experiment.

200

FLF
⊥
FLF
k

100
0

FLF [N]

C. Tangential force optimization

|Fk |
|F⊥ |
|F⊥ |
|Fmax
|
⊥

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

γ

Fig. 10: The average tangential to normal force ratio as a
function of the regularization parameter γ in (10). Force ratios
are measured for a fixed configuration with ANYmal standing
on the V-shaped terrain. The error bars represent the maximum
and minimum values across the feet.
We investigated the effect of the regularization parameter
γ in (10) on ANYmal standing on the V terrain with surface
inclinations of 30 and 19 degrees. Fig. 10 summarizes the
results of the test, where the ratio between measured tangential and normal forces is plotted for different values of
γ. Additionally, the ratio between the normal forces and the
maximum across the experiments is provided. As expected,
the maximum normal forces occur for the smallest value of
γ. The trade-off driven by γ is visible: for large values, the
contact force magnitude is minimized at the expenses of more
significant tangential components, while for a smaller value
the tangential components are reduced by creating additional
internal forces.
A value of γ = 0.25 was selected for the rest of the
experiments. Lower values do not significantly decrease the
magnitude of tangential forces and start to show increased

0

1

2

3

4

200
100
0
0

2

6

4

Time [s]

Fig. 13: Normal and absolute tangential components of the
contact forces while walking on V-shaped terrain terrain.
Standard controller on top and terrain aware controller on
bottom.

F⊥ [N]

1

Standard
controller
Terrain
aware
controller
Slippage

300
200
100
20

40

60

80

Fk [N]

100

120

Standard
controller
quartiles
Terain
aware
controller
quartiles

Fig. 14: Scatter plot of normal and tangential force components while walking on V-shaped terrain terrain.
In Fig. 6, the qualitative difference between the standard and
the terrain aware controller is evident. The contact forces, both
the requested and the measured, are vertical for the standard
controller and roughly aligned to the local ground normal
for the terrain aware controller. Fig. 11 gives a quantitative
counterpart. The graph shows the behavior of the tangential to
normal force ratio during different experiments. We conducted
these experiments in stationary conditions on the V-shaped
terrain (pitch and roll direction, respectively 1 and 2 in the

D. Effect on locomotion

F⊥ [N]

300
200
100

50

100

150

200

Fk [N]

Terain
aware
controller
quartiles
Standard
controller
quartiles

F⊥ [N]

Fig. 15: Scatter plot of forces while walking on large round
stones.

200

100

50

100

Fk [N]

150

Terain
aware
controller
quartiles
Standard
controller
quartiles

7

0.3
0.2
0.1
14

16

18

20

22

24

y [m]

1
0.5

26

Standard
controller
Terain
aware
controller

0
0

20

40

60

Time [s]

x [m]

Fig. 17: LF foot y coordinate while walking inside concrete
tube.
3
2
1
0

z [m]

plot), in the sewer tube (3) and in over the large stones
(4). The black error bars show the maximum and minimum
ratio measured. The experiments performed over different
terrains confirm that the controller is effective in reducing the
tangential component of the contact forces.
The graph in Fig. 12 illustrates the tangential to normal
contact force ratio for the same quasi-static experiment of
Fig. 8. The experiment shows how the terrain aware controller
always manage to maintain a lower ratio (for the same local
inclination) and how this results in a higher maximum inclination before slippage, which occurs roughly at the same ratio.
The asymmetry of the terrain explains the non-monotonous behavior and the local minimum occurs when opposing surfaces
have exactly the same inclination.
The graph in Fig. 13 shows the normal and absolute tangential component of the left foot contact force while walking over
the V-shaped terrain with the standard and the terrain aware
controller. The graphs show qualitatively that the proposed
controller reduces the magnitude of the tangential component
also when walking and not only in static conditions. The
scatter plots in Fig. 14 gives a more complete picture of Fi⊥
and Fik for the same experiment. The forces recorded during
the experiment are represented as dots, while the dashed lines
represent the quartiles of the distribution. In the scatter plot
the number of points has been reduced for clarity. It is evident
how the terrain aware controller moves the distribution towards
lower tangential to normal ratio.

y [m]

VALSECCHI et al.: QUADRUPEDAL LOCOMOTION ON UNEVEN TERRAIN WITH SENSORIZED FEET

0

20

0

20

40

60

40

60

1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0

Standard
controller
Terain
aware
controller
Tube end

Time [s]

Fig. 18: LF foot x and z coordinates while walking inside
concrete tube.
(compared to the V-shaped terrain). Another effect is slippage
which occurs with both controllers, however with different
intensity, and interferes with the force distribution.
Fig.17 show the behavior of the y coordinate of the left
front foot while walking in the pipe. The top graph focuses on
the short period dynamics: the standard controller introduces
very evident spikes of 10 cm completely absent in the terrain
aware controller. Slippage, clearly observed during the tests,
explain the spikes. The foothold locations commanded by the
controller are too steep. Immediately after touchdown, the foot
slips toward the center of the pipe. The bottom graph shows
the long period effect of slippage: after only 50 seconds, the
time necessary to traverse the 3 m tube, the state estimator
drifted over 0.5 m. The drift for the terrain aware controller
instead is not visible from the graph. Fig.18 shows the behavior
of the x (top) and z (bottom) coordinates. From the x plot,
a slightly higher velocity can be attributed to the terrain
aware controller which reaches the end of the tube before the
standard controller. The z graph shows again a significant drift
for the standard controller and a much more contained drift
for the terrain aware controller.
It can be concluded that even if the effect on the optimization of the tangential force is smaller than in the artificial test
case with very defined geometry, the terrain aware controller
has a positive effect on locomotion by reducing slippage and
containing drift of the state estimator.

Fig. 16: Scatter plot of forces while walking inside the tube.
IV. C ONCLUSION
Fig.15 and 16 show a scatter plots of the contact force while
walking on the large stones of picture 5d and in the pipe
of Fig. 5c. While the shift towards lower ratio observed in
14 is confirmed, the effect is less significant than in the lab
tests. This reduced effect is a prevalent result also for other
terrains. One possible interpretation for this effect could be the
shape of the terrain less suitable for producing internal forces

In this paper, a sensorized foot design, capable of measuring
the ground contact forces as well as the ground normal using
force/torque and IMU sensors, was presented, together with a
control strategy that leverages its capabilities by optimization
of the contact forces. The experiments confirmed an improvement in the perception capabilities of ANYmal, which is now
able to sense the inclination of the ground at the contact

8

IEEE ROBOTICS AND AUTOMATION LETTERS. PREPRINT VERSION. ACCEPTED JANUARY, 2020

points and locally measure the ground reaction force. The
additional information can be effectively used to minimize the
tangential component of the contact forces, which result in a
lower probability of slipping. The improved force distribution
is particularly effective for terrains characterized by strong
local inclination and low friction coefficient.
While the results obtained so far are encouraging, the
proposed approach could be further improved both on the
hardware and on the software side. Replacing the IMUs with
encoders could reduce the amount of noise introduced by
impact and vibrations. A fusion of the information coming
from the feet in the state estimation could lead to a more
performant and reliable estimation of the contact state, with
consequent benefits.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors want to thank Klajd Lika and Ilias Patsiaouras
from Bota Systems as well as Markus Stäuble from ETH - RSL
for their help in integrating the force/torque sensors into the
feet.
R EFERENCES
[1] Jörg P. Müller. Control architectures for autonomous and interacting
agents: A survey. In Lawrence Cavedon, Anand Rao, and Wayne
Wobcke, editors, Intelligent Agent Systems Theoretical and Practical
Issues, pages 1–26, Berlin, Heidelberg, 1997. Springer Berlin Heidelberg.
[2] Masato Hirose and Kenichi Ogawa. Honda humanoid robots development. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A: Mathematical,
Physical and Engineering Sciences, 365(1850):11–19, 2007.
[3] Thomas Buschmann, Sebastian Lohmeier, and Heinz Ulbrich. Humanoid
robot lola: Design and walking control. Journal of Physiology-Paris,
103(3):141 – 148, 2009. Neurorobotics.
[4] Ill-Woo Park, Jung-Yup Kim, Jungho Lee, and Jun-Ho Oh. Mechanical
design of humanoid robot platform khr-3 (kaist humanoid robot 3:
Hubo). pages 321 – 326, 02 2005.
[5] F. Negrello, M. Garabini, M. G. Catalano, P. Kryczka, W. Choi, D. G.
Caldwell, A. Bicchi, and N. G. Tsagarakis. Walk-man humanoid lower
body design optimization for enhanced physical performance. In 2016
IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA),
pages 1817–1824, May 2016.
[6] C. Semini, V. Barasuol, J. Goldsmith, M. Frigerio, M. Focchi, Y. Gao,
and D. G. Caldwell. Design of the hydraulically actuated, torquecontrolled quadruped robot hyq2max. IEEE/ASME Transactions on
Mechatronics, 22(2):635–646, April 2017.
[7] M. Hutter, C. Gehring, A. Lauber, F. Gunther, C. D. Bellicoso,
V. Tsounis, P. Fankhauser, R. Diethelm, S. Bachmann, M. Bloesch,
H. Kolvenbach, M. Bjelonic, L. Isler, and K. Meyer. Anymal - toward
legged robots for harsh environments. Advanced Robotics, 31(17):918–
931, 2017.
[8] Gerardo Bledt, Matthew J Powell, Benjamin Katz, Jared Di Carlo,
Patrick Wensing, and Sangbae Kim. Mit cheetah 3: Design and control
of a robust, dynamic quadruped robot. 10 2018.
[9] B. Katz, J. D. Carlo, and S. Kim. Mini cheetah: A platform for
pushing the limits of dynamic quadruped control. In 2019 International
Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pages 6295–6301, May
2019.
[10] S. Hirose, K. Yoneda, and H. Tsukagoshi. Titan vii: quadruped walking
and manipulating robot on a steep slope. In Proceedings of International
Conference on Robotics and Automation, volume 1, pages 494–500
vol.1, April 1997.
[11] S. Abad, N. Herzig, S. M. H. Sadati, and T. Nanayakkara. Significance
of the compliance of the joints on the dynamic slip resistance of a
bioinspired hoof. IEEE Transactions on Robotics, pages 1–14, 2019.
[12] Hector Montes, Samir Nabulsi, and Manuel A. Armada. Reliable, builtin, high-accuracy force sensing for legged robots. The International
Journal of Robotics Research, 25(9):931–950, 2006.

[13] K. Suwanratchatamanee, M. Matsumoto, and S. Hashimoto. Haptic sensing foot system for humanoid robot and ground recognition with one-leg
balance. IEEE Transactions on Industrial Electronics, 58(8):3174–3186,
Aug 2011.
[14] J. Rogelio Guadarrama-Olvera, F. Bergner, E. Dean, and G. Cheng.
Enhancing biped locomotion on unknown terrain using tactile feedback.
In 2018 IEEE-RAS 18th International Conference on Humanoid Robots
(Humanoids), pages 1–9, Nov 2018.
[15] K. Fondahl, D. Kuehn, F. Beinersdorf, F. Bernhard, F. Grimminger,
M. Schilling, T. Stark, and F. Kirchner. An adaptive sensor foot
for a bipedal and quadrupedal robot. In 2012 4th IEEE RAS EMBS
International Conference on Biomedical Robotics and Biomechatronics
(BioRob), pages 270–275, June 2012.
[16] L WAGNER, Péter Fankhauser, Michael Bloesch, and Marco Hutter.
Foot contact estimation for legged robots in rough terrain: Proceedings
of the 19th International Conference on CLAWAR 2016, pages 395–403.
10 2016.
[17] Shigeo Hirose, Souichi Inoue, and Kan Yoneda. The whisker sensor
and the transmission of multiple sensor signals. Advanced Robotics,
4(2):105–117, 1989.
[18] Marco Hutter, Mark Hoepflinger, C Remy, and Roland Siegwart. Hybrid
operational space control for compliant legged systems. 07 2012.
[19] Michele Focchi, Andrea del Prete, Ioannis Havoutis, Darwin G. Featherstone, Roya nd Caldwell, and Claudio Semini. High-slope terrain
locomotion for torque-controlled quadruped robots. Autonomous Robots,
41(1):259–272, Jan 2017.
[20] Ludovic Righetti et al. Optimal distribution of contact forces with
inverse-dynamics control. The International Journal of Robotics Research, 32(3):280–298, 2013.
[21] C. Gehring et al. Dynamic trotting on slopes for quadrupedal robots.
In 2015 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and
Systems (IROS), pages 5129–5135, Sep. 2015.
[22] C. Dario Bellicoso et al. Perception-less terrain adaptation through
whole body control and hierarchical optimization. In 2016 IEEE-RAS
16th International Conference on Humanoid Robots (Humanoids), pages
558–564, Nov 2016.
[23] Peter D. Neuhaus, Jerry Pratt, and Matthew Johnson. Comprehensive
summary of the institute for human and machine cognition’s experience
with littledog. I. J. Robotic Res., 30:216–235, 01 2011.
[24] Matt Zucker et al. Optimization and learning for rough terrain legged
locomotion. The International Journal of Robotics Research, 30(2):175–
191, 2011.
[25] Péter Fankhauser, Marko Bjelonic, Dario Bellicoso, Takahiro Miki, and
Marco Hutter. Robust rough-terrain locomotion with a quadrupedal
robot. 05 2018.
[26] Michele Focchi, Romeo Orsolino, Marco Camurri, Victor Barasuol, Carlos Mastalli, Darwin Caldwell, and Claudio Semini. Heuristic Planning
for Rough Terrain Locomotion in Presence of External Disturbances
and Variable Perception Quality. 01 2018.
[27] C. Dario Bellicoso, F. Jenelten, P. Fankhauser, C. Gehring, J. Hwangbo,
and M. Hutter. Dynamic locomotion and whole-body control for
quadrupedal robots. In 2017 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on
Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), pages 3359–3365, Sep. 2017.
[28] M. Bloesch et al. State estimation for legged robots on unstable
and slippery terrain. In 2013 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on
Intelligent Robots and Systems, pages 6058–6064, Nov 2013.
[29] C Dario Bellicoso, Fabian Jenelten, Christian Gehring, and Marco
Hutter. Dynamic locomotion through online nonlinear motion optimization for quadrupedal robots. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters,
3(3):2261–2268, 2018.
[30] F. Jenelten et al. Dynamic locomotion on slippery ground. IEEE
Robotics and Automation Letters, 4(4):4170–4176, 2019.
[31] M Hutter, H Sommer, C Gehring, M. Hoepflinger, M Bloesch, and
R Siegwart. Quadrupedal locomotion using hierarchical operational
space control. The International Journal of Robotics Research (IJRR),
33(8):1062–1077, may 2014.

