Path Planning and Foothold Adaptation
for Quadrupedal Locomotion on
Challenging Terrain
Yong-Hoon Lee, Gijeong Kim, Tae Gyu Song, and Hae-Won Park(B)
DRCD Lab, KAIST, 291 Daehak-ro, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon, Korea
{ryyh33,kijoung0963,thdxorb5515,haewonpark}@kaist.ac.kr
https://www.dynamicrobot.kaist.ac.kr/

Abstract. In this work, we propose a combined path planning algorithm and foothold adaptation for quadrupedal locomotion in challenging terrain. The proposed path planning algorithm, based on Rapidlyexploring Random Tree* (RRT*), eﬃciently determines kinematically
feasible paths for quadruped considering the given terrain information.
However, following a body reference alone is insuﬃcient to overcome
the entire of challenging terrain, as the path planning could not capture whole scenarios, the robot must adapt its plan based on its current
situation. Therefore, we use reactive foothold adaptation and generate
collision-free swing leg trajectories aligned with the adapted foothold
positions. Through the experiments in a 3D simulation environment featuring a sparse stepping stone map, we demonstrate the eﬃcacy of our
combined framework, comprising path planning and foothold adaptation.
Keywords: Path Planning · Foothold Adaptation · Model Predictive
Control · Quadruped Locomotion

1

Introduction

Recently, legged robots have shown their dynamic capabilities based on optimal control frameworks, speciﬁcally Model Predictive Control (MPC) [1, 4, 9].
Extensive applications on various legged robot platforms have demonstrated the
impressive performance of MPC, encompassing high-speed running [12], robust
walking [3], and complex dynamic motions. However, most existing research primarily focuses on maintaining robot balance and robustly tracking commands
based on dynamics, while disregarding the inﬂuence of the surrounding environment. To enhance generality and achieve diverse locomotion capabilities, there
is a growing need to investigate terrain-aware locomotion strategies. This work
is in line with this motivation and proposes a hierarchical framework that combines a global path planner that ﬁnds out kinematically feasible body reference
trajectory with subsequent local foothold adaptation during motion execution
for stable locomotion of quadruped.
c The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2025

D. Park et al. (Eds.): RiTA 2024, LNNS 1419, pp. 194–205, 2025.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-92011-0_16

Path Planning and Foothold Adaptation

1.1

195

Related Work

Terrain Aware Locomotion, Combined Approach. For terrain-aware locomotion, it is crucial to consider the selection of appropriate foothold positions
to navigate through diﬀerent terrain conditions. However, addressing foothold
position alone poses challenges in terms of tractability as it disregards the inherent coupling between foothold position and the dynamics of body motion [2].
The coupled property between body motion and foothold position arises from
that the robot relies on ground reaction forces to control its body in a desired
manner while maintaining stability in the selected foothold position. Hence, one
approach is the coupled approach, wherein the model predictive control problem plans the body motion and foothold positions together [2, 8,10]. In this
approach, the traversable region is given through segmented planes, which are
utilized as explicit constraints for determining the foothold positions. By incorporating these constraints, the optimization process jointly optimizes the body
trajectory and foothold positions concurrently, taking into account the whole
body dynamics. Due to the model complexity including whole body dynamics,
kinematic limit, and constraints from the surrounding map, these frameworks
are hardly reproduced in other research groups.
Terrain Aware Locomotion, Hierarchical Approach. Another commonly
used approach in terrain-aware locomotion is the hierarchical approach, where
the process is divided into two stages: foothold planning and the generation of
dynamically feasible body motion [6,11,12,15]. This approach is widely adopted
due to its simplicity, as researchers often incorporate foothold adaptation into an
existing framework while reusing their previous framework for generating body
motion. In this approach, the foothold position is reactively adapted based on
the commanded body trajectory within the traversable terrain. Subsequently, a
dynamically feasible body motion is generated by solving an optimization problem that considers only the dynamic equations under the predeﬁned foothold
positions. However, using the predeﬁned foothold positions can introduce potential challenges in the dynamic perspective, such as a limited support polygon,
because the foothold planning is conducted without considering the body’s
dynamics explicitly. Therefore, further work makes the desired body conﬁguration through pose optimization to guarantee the stability under the given
foothold position [7], or makes the desired body reference that maximizes the
potential adapted foothold region to make the robot more robust under the
uncertainty [6].
Global Planning. The above works primarily focus on local planning strategies
for quadruped locomotion on challenging terrains, aiming to determine appropriate actions for maintaining balance and accurately tracking commanded velocities. To fully utilize the capabilities and extend the range of applicability of local
controller performance, researchers have developed global planners that determine reference body position trajectories from the initial to the goal position,

196

Y.-H. Lee et al.

considering speciﬁc feasibility criteria such as dynamic feasibility [13] or obstacle free [5]. [13] uses the RRT-connect method to ﬁnd out dynamically feasible
paths, which are subsequently utilized as reference trajectories for the model predictive control [14]. To reduce computational complexity, they employ simpliﬁed
dynamics models and sample dynamically feasible new nodes by integrating sampled control inputs. In [5], the A* method is utilized to identify feasible paths
and avoid obstacles, between the start and goal position, and these obtained
paths are then employed as references for the low-level model predictive control
(MPC) framework.
1.2

Proposed Approach

Building upon our existing model predictive control (MPC) framework, we integrate a global path planner and a local foothold adaptation module to form a
hierarchical framework designed to navigate challenging terrains, such as sparse
stepping stones with varying heights, using provided terrain information. While
our previous MPC framework performed eﬀectively on ﬂat and sloped terrains
without visual feedback, it faced limitations in more complex scenarios, especially during vision-based walking, where the absence of a high-level planner
restricted its ability to manage multiple steps or complex obstacles.
In this work, we ﬁrst employ the RRT* path planning algorithm to generate
a kinematically feasible reference trajectory from the start to the goal position, ensuring that potential foothold positions align with body conﬁgurations.
The robot then follows this trajectory with reactive foothold adaptation, maintaining valid foothold positions during the stance phases. This integrated approach enables the robot to traverse challenging terrains by dynamically adjusting
foothold positions in response to the kinematically feasible planned trajectory.

2

Architecture Overview

Fig. 1. Illustration of the whole architecture, the colored box indicates the components
that are addressed in this study.

Given the starting point and terrain information, the RRT* algorithm computes
a kinematically feasible path of body nodes for the robot. Each body node speciﬁes the robot’s body position and yaw, ensuring that valid foothold positions
are available nearby. The solution path derived from the RRT* algorithm is then
passed to a reference generator that operates concurrently with the controller.

Path Planning and Foothold Adaptation

197

This generator produces a reference body trajectory by interpolating between
successive nodes along the path. The reference generator also derives reference
foot trajectory; however, it does not directly use the footholds corresponding to
body nodes in the path planning phase. Instead, it applies local adaptation to
footholds derived from Raibert heuristics.
The proposed framework uses both the body reference and the adapted
foothold positions to address an optimal control problem using a baseline controller [9]. This baseline controller resolves the nonlinear MPC problem to create
a dynamically feasible motion that minimizes the MPC cost (regulating error of
state and control input) for the given foothold positions. The ground reaction
forces derived from the solution are then applied to the stance leg. Additionally,
a swing leg PD controller guides the foot toward the next foothold position. A
full overview of this framework is presented in Fig. 1.

3

Path Planning for Kinematic Feasible Path

The RRT* (Rapidly-exploring Random Tree) algorithm is a probabilistic roadmap-based motion planning algorithm widely used in robotics and
autonomous systems (Algorithm 1). It eﬃciently constructs a tree-based representation of the conﬁguration space to ﬁnd an optimal path between a start
and goal conﬁguration. Unlike its predecessor, the RRT algorithm, RRT* aims
to improve the optimality of the generated paths by iteratively rewiring the tree
structure.

Algorithm 1: RRT* path planner pseudo code
Input : xinit , φ
Output: Path(xnew , V )
V ← {(xinit , φ)}
for i = 1, 2, . . . , nmax do
xrand ← SampleFree()
xnearest ← Nearest(xrand , V )
xnew ← Steer(xnearest , xrand )
if ObstacleFree(xnew ) = true then
χnear ← Near(xnearest , V, nneighbors )
xparent ← ChooseParent(xnew , χnear , V )
V ← V ∪ {(xnew , xparent )}
Rewire(χnear , xnew )
if Goal(xnew ) = true then
break
end
end
end
return Path(xnew , V )

198

Y.-H. Lee et al.

The function ObstacleF ree checks whether there are stones that can put
all four feet in the given state xnew (Algorithm 2). If it exists, the state xnew
is feasible, and if there is no stone to step on even one foot, the state xnew is
judged to be colliding with an obstacle in RRT* algorithm (infeasible) as shown
in Fig. 2. The position to put each foot, obtained here, is not entered into MPC
as a foothold reference.
Algorithm 2: ObstacleFree for kinematic feasibility
Function ObstacleFree(xnew ):
for i = 1,2,3,4 do
F ooti ← F oot(i, xnew )
end
if CheckN earestStone(F ooti ) = true f or all i then
return true
else
return f alse
end
return

Fig. 2. Left : Kinematically infeasible case, Right : Kinematically feasible case

Since our RRT* path planner only considers kinematic feasibility for computational eﬃciency without considering dynamic feasibility, it is important to
obtain a path as smooth as possible without sharp curvature. Therefore, we
can obtain a suﬃciently smooth path by setting the length of the robot’s CoM
path and yaw diﬀerence as the cost and optimizing nearly through the RRT*
algorithm (Algorithm 3, 4).
While the simple ObstacleF ree function presented in this paper ensures kinematic feasibility, it does not guarantee dynamic feasibility. For scenarios involving locomotion on relatively static and less challenging terrains, path planning
without considering dynamic feasibility is feasible. However, when dealing with
terrains that necessitate dynamic feasibility considerations (e.g. overcoming large
gap), the ObstacleF ree function presented in this paper is unable to generate a
feasible path.

Path Planning and Foothold Adaptation

199

Algorithm 3: ChooseParent function
Function ChooseParent(xnew , χnear , V ):
xparent ← {φ}
costmin ← ∞
for xnear ∈ χnear do
cost ← Cost(xnear ) + distance(xnear , xnew )
if cost < costmin then
costmin ← cost
xparent ← xnear
end
end
return xparent
return

Algorithm 4: Rewire function
Function Rewire(χnear , xnew ):
for xnear ∈ χnear do
costnew ← Cost(xnew ) + distance(xnew , xnear )
if costnew < Cost(xnear ) then
xparent ← Parent(xnear )
Replace the parent of xnear with xnew in V
end
end
return

4

Foothold Adaptation

This section explains a foothold adaptation method for the quadruped robot to
follow the node given in path planning. Due to the computational load of the
path planning process, it is challenging to plan all footholds during locomotion,
and the robot may not be able to follow the planned body nodes and footholds
perfectly. Fixed foothold positions without adjustment would fail to meet the
robot’s evolving motion requirements eﬀectively.
4.1

Foothold position

We used modiﬁed Raibert’s heuristic to obtain a nominal foothold position.
Raibert’s heuristic is widely utilized because it ensures that each foot lands
beneath the corresponding hip during the middle of the stance phase, assuming
the robot is moving at a constant velocity. The robot foot positioned below the
hip, on average over time during the stance phase, helps to stabilize the body
by allowing each foot of the robot to do a balanced stance. The next foothold
position is ﬁrst determined by the original Raibert’s heuristic as follows.

200

Y.-H. Lee et al.

Fig. 3. Illustration of the foothold adaptation process, the nominal foothold position
is adjusted to the nearest feasible region.

pf oot = phip +

Ts
vbase ,
2

(1)

where Ts is the stance phase time, and vbase is the base velocity. However,
it cannot be guaranteed that there is feasible ground to set foot on at that
location. Therefore, the calculated foothold position is moved to the nearest
feasible region if infeasible. Fig. 3 visualizes the process of adjustment from the
nominal foothold computed from Raibert’s heuristic to the adapted foothold.
At this time, the feasible region is determined by placing a 5 cm safety margin
parallel to the boundary of the land that can be stepped on.
The foothold position is not pre-determined in the path planning stage but
is determined reactively according to the current hip’s position and the base’s
speed. If the torso reference and the foothold reference are derived together in
the path-planning stage, they are correlated with each other. Hence, the foothold
position is feasible only when the base tracks the torso reference well. This causes
instability when the foot follows the foothold reference, but the robot’s base is
out of torso reference due to disturbance or uncertainty. The reactive foothold
decision prevents the feet from moving ahead of the body and causing instability.
The calculated next foothold position is reﬂected in the forward pass process of
the MPC.
4.2

Swing Trajectory

The foothold position determined in Sect. 4.1 corresponds to the arrival point of
the swing trajectory. After selecting the start and arrival of the swing trajectory,
a curve connecting them must be designed. Fig. 4(a) and 4(b) show how the swing
trajectory is generated in the upstairs and downstairs situations, respectively.
The layover of the swing trajectory should be located near arrival when going
down the step and near the start when going up the step so that the legs do
not collide with the terrain. We deﬁne the layover weight alpha as a modiﬁed

Path Planning and Foothold Adaptation

201

sigmoid function for the height diﬀerence between arrival and start. From the
layover weight, the position of the layover is determined as follows.
xlayover = αxstart + (1 − α)xarrival
ylayover = αystart + (1 − α)yarrival
zlayover = (1 − α)zstart + αzarrival ,

(2)
(3)
(4)

where x, y, and z are components of a 3-D position in the global frame.
Then, the 11th-order bezier curve deﬁned by start, layover, and arrival is set
as the swing trajectory reference. This swing trajectory does not contain hard
constraints to ensure collision avoidance, but it works well in general non-ﬂat
terrain.

Fig. 4. Illustration of the adjusting swing leg trajectory to ensure collision-free with
terrain.

5

Results

The evaluation was conducted on maps under various conditions to study the
proposed path planner and reference generator’s performance. The conditions of
the MPC parameters remain constant. First, the results of path planning based
on RRT* are shown in Sect. 5.1. Second, Sect. 5.2 explains the results of a task
in which a robot traverses a challenging terrain based on the path planner and
reference generator. Finally, problems arising from traversing tasks are addressed
in Sect. 5.3.

202

Y.-H. Lee et al.

5.1

Path Planning

Figure 5 provides path planning results of various maps. For all three cases, the
steer length, the distance to create a new node from an existing node in the
path search process, is the same as 0.1 m. From the path planning, a feasible
path for the robot to pass from the initial point to the goal point was derived.
In addition to avoiding terrain that cannot be crossed due to a lack of stepping
stones, feasible and infeasible paths are distinguished kinematically. It does not
cross over large gaps or navigate points where edges meet. For example, in Fig.
5(a), passing through the narrow route between holes seems to be the shortest
path. However, the path planner considers this to be kinematically infeasible and
instead creates a curved way that avoids the holes. As we checked on the map in
several cases, the created paths were all smooth enough for the robot to track.
In a map with less sparsity, a path close to a straight line is created instead of
an unnecessary curved path. On the other hand, in a map with large sparsity, a
curved path is made to avoid holes to satisfy kinematic feasibility. About 2,000
nodes are required to complete path planning in a map environment with a size
of 4 m in width and 8 m in length.

Fig. 5. Results of the path planning (RRT*) in diverse maps. The blue line represents
the path that has been identiﬁed using the path planning algorithm. The green line
indicates the edges connecting the nodes in the path, while the red line represents the
rewired edges. As shown in the ﬁgure, the planner successfully found the kinematic
feasible path from the initial point to the goal region, avoiding the empty region.

5.2

Traversing Challenging Terrain

In the traversing challenging terrain task, a steer length of 0.4 m was applied to
path planning. Fig. 6 shows that the robot walks along a given node through
foothold adaptation in a situation where the sparsity of the stepping stone exists.
The terrain is generated by distributing stepping stones based on a Gaussian
function and creating gaps in certain areas, making it challenging to traverse the
terrain with a simple straight path. If only the simple Raibert’s heuristic were
used, the robot easily fall as it could step into the air (not a stepping stone)
and lose its balance. However, the robot can pass through sparse terrain because
the arrival point of the swing trajectory is always set to the feasible ground
through foothold adaptation. Additionally, the foothold adaptation is based on

Path Planning and Foothold Adaptation

203

Fig. 6. Simulation results of the whole framework. The robot follows the generated
nodes (represented by red dots within its height range). The snapshots shown in panels
(a) to (f) illustrate the robot’s progression over time. The robot adapts its next foothold
position (indicated by blue disks) to the stepping stone, ensuring proper ground reaction forces are generated by MPC in the designated foothold positions.

Raibert’s heuristic, the robot doesn’t step too far or too close to the robot’s
hip position unnecessarily. As the robot follows the body reference trajectory
marked by the red dot in Fig. 6(b), it adapts the Front Left (FL) foothold by
moving it inward due to the absence of a valid foothold in the outward direction.
Additionally, in Fig. 6(f), the robot restricts the forward movement of the FL
leg to ensure dynamic stability when it goes descending direction while allowing
the Rear Right (RR) foothold to move forward.

Fig. 7. Success rate of traversal based on terrain diﬃculty.

Figure 7 shows the robot’s success rate of traversal based on terrain diﬃculty,
speciﬁcally the peak height of Gaussian function-based terrain. As the peak
height increases, the terrain becomes steeper. The robot’s starting position and
gap locations were randomly assigned to measure an average success rate. For
successful traversal, several conditions must be satisﬁed together: a feasible path
needs to be identiﬁed, the MPC accurately tracks this path to prevent the robot

204

Y.-H. Lee et al.

from falling, and foothold adaptation also functions eﬀectively. Considering these
factors, the overall results demonstrate a reasonable success rate. Despite these
achievements, the success rate is highly dependent on terrain conditions such as
slope and sparsity. The reasons for this are discussed in the next subsection.
5.3

Limitations

The fundamental challenge during traversing tasks is that the path planner
primarily focuses on achieving kinematic feasibility while neglecting dynamic
feasibility considerations. Even though the robot tries to capture its dynamic
feasibility through foothold adaptation, if the planned trajectory is too hard
to follow dynamically (e.g. rapid direction change), the robot cannot stabilize
for this commanded path. In other words, the reference generator creates a reference trajectory simply by linear interpolating x, y, and yaw between nodes,
dynamic stability during walking is not guaranteed with only the proposed path
planner and reference generator. Although our framework addresses this issue
to some extent through foothold adaptation, it may not be suﬃcient for tackling more challenging environments, such as steeper stairs. As a result, although
path planning generally derives a smooth path, in our experiments, In some
cases, the signiﬁcant diﬀerence in yaw commands between nodes can lead to
instability issues when the robot tries to track them.
Another limitation of this study is that many terrains cannot be overcome
because a given node is tracked with a constant gait pattern and speed. For
example, terrain that cannot be reached by walking gait but can be passed by
jumping is hard to overcome with the current control structure.

6

Conclusion

This paper proposes a hierarchical framework for enhancing the locomotion capabilities of legged robots in challenging terrains. It combines CoM path planning
using the RRT* algorithm with local foothold adaptation. The RRT* algorithm
creates a path from the initial point to the goal region by considering kinematic
feasibility, where the potential foothold positions are valid with corresponding
body conﬁgurations. While tracking the path, the robot made it step on the
stepping stone through foothold adaptation and prevented collision by applying
layover weight to the swing trajectory. The proposed method demonstrated successful route creation and traversal in various maps with sparse stepping stones.
Future work will focus on expanding this approach by incorporating dynamic
feasibility into the path planning process, enabling the robot to overcome even
more arbitrary and challenging terrains.
Acknowledgements. This research was supported by the KAIST Convergence
Research Institute Operation Program.

Path Planning and Foothold Adaptation

205

References
1. Bledt, G., Kim, S.: Implementing regularized predictive control for simultaneous
real-time footstep and ground reaction force optimization. In: 2019 IEEE/RSJ
International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), pp. 6316–
6323 (2019)
2. Corbères, T., et al.: Perceptive locomotion through whole-body MPC and optimal
region selection. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.08926 (2023)
3. Di Carlo, J., Wensing, P.M., Katz, B., Bledt, G., Kim, S.: Dynamic locomotion in
the MIT cheetah 3 through convex model-predictive control. In: 2018 IEEE/RSJ
International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), pp. 1–9 (2018)
4. Ding, Y., Pandala, A., Li, C., Shin, Y.H., Park, H.: Representation-free model
predictive control for dynamic motions in quadrupeds. IEEE Trans. Rob. 37(4),
1154–1171 (2021)
5. Dudzik, T., et al.: Robust autonomous navigation of a small-scale quadruped robot
in real-world environments. In: 2020 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), pp. 3664–3671. IEEE (2020)
6. Fahmi, S., Barasuol, V., Esteban, D., Villarreal, O., Semini, C.: ViTAL: visionbased terrain-aware locomotion for legged robots. IEEE Trans. Rob. 39(2), 885–
904 (2022)
7. Fankhauser, P., Bjelonic, M., Bellicoso, C.D., Miki, T., Hutter, M.: Robust roughterrain locomotion with a quadrupedal robot. In: 2018 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pp. 5761–5768. IEEE (2018)
8. Grandia, R., Jenelten, F., Yang, S., Farshidian, F., Hutter, M.: Perceptive locomotion through nonlinear model-predictive control. IEEE Trans. Rob. 39(5), 3402–
3421 (2023)
9. Hong, S., Kim, J.H., Park, H.W.: Real-time constrained nonlinear model predictive
control on SO(3) for dynamic legged locomotion. In: IEEE International Conference
on Intelligent Robots and Systems (2020)
10. Jenelten, F., Grandia, R., Farshidian, F., Hutter, M.: TAMOLS: terrain-aware
motion optimization for legged systems. IEEE Trans. Rob. 38(6), 3395–3413 (2022)
11. Jenelten, F., Miki, T., Vijayan, A.E., Bjelonic, M., Hutter, M.: Perceptive locomotion in rough terrain-online foothold optimization. IEEE Rob. Autom. Lett. 5(4),
5370–5376 (2020)
12. Magana, O., Barasuol, V., Camurri, M., Franceschi, L., Focchi, M., Pontil, M.,
Caldwell, D.G., Semini, C.: Fast and continuous foothold adaptation for dynamic
locomotion through CNNs. IEEE Rob. Autom. Lett. 4(2), 2140–2147 (2019)
13. Norby, J., Johnson, A.M.: Fast global motion planning for dynamic legged robots.
In: 2020 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems
(IROS), pp. 3829–3836. IEEE (2020)
14. Norby, J., et al.: Quad-SDK: full stack software framework for agile quadrupedal
locomotion. In: ICRA Workshop on Legged Robots (2022)
15. Risbourg, F., Corbères, T., Léziart, P.A., Flayols, T., Mansard, N., Tonneau, S.:
Real-time footstep planning and control of the solo quadruped robot in 3D environments. In: 2022 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and
Systems (IROS), pp. 12950–12956. IEEE (2022)

